Parliament, Monday, 18 November 2019 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises, Mr Khaya Magaxa, has noted with concern the utterances made by trade unions currently engaged in the South African Airways (SAA) strike. Mr Magaxa said the recent reports in the public domain urging South Africans not to fly with SAA, following the national carrier’s announcement that international flights will be reinstated, are reckless and sabotage the national carrier.
	
	“Whilst the committee supports the rights of employees to strike within the confines of labour laws, it is irresponsible for the unions to make comments that the flights will be operated by short-term contracted personnel without the requisite experience.”
	
	Mr Magaxa said the committee acknowledges the challenges facing SAA, which are a direct result of malfeasance and corruption caused by state capture. “Workers are not responsible for the situation at the national carrier,” said Mr Magaxa.
	
	Mr Magaxa urges SAA management and unions to negotiate to find a solution to resolve the strike, as it has serious ramifications for SAA’s financial situation and other unintended consequences in the economy and the tourism sector.
	
	“The committee would like to appeal to workers not to damage and destroy SAA’s credibility. If the employees continue down the path of destruction, this will lead to the destruction of jobs that we seek to protect and increase,” said Mr Magaxa. “The SAA brand is important in ensuring improvement and profitability,” he added.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES, MR KHAYA MAGAXA
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more