Parliament, Tuesday, 26 November 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities notes the theme for this year’s 16 Days of Activism proposed by the Department of Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities – “Enough is Enough: Together fast-tracking implementation to end gender-based violence”. Committee Chairperson Ms Nonhlanhla Ncube-Ndaba noted that 25 November is the beginning of the 16 Days of Activism campaign. It is important to highlight, she said, that the key to ending gender-based violence and femicide (GBVF) in South Africa is ensuring that the National Strategic Plan on GBVF is finalised and implemented. The committee will monitor and assess progress in this regard. The 16 Days of Activism against Gender Violence is an international campaign originating from the first Women’s Global Leadership Institute, sponsored by the Center for Women’s Global Leadership in 1991. It runs from 25 November, International Day against Violence against Women, to 10 December, International Human Rights Day. Participants at the time chose these dates in order to symbolically link violence against women and human rights, emphasising that such violence is a violation of human rights. The period was designated by the United Nations General Assembly to raise public awareness on gender-based violence in line with resolution 54/134 of 17 December 1999. Furthermore, during this time, the 16-day period also highlights International Women Human Rights Defenders Day on 29 November and World AIDS Day on 1 December. Moreover, in the Southern African Development Community (SADC) region, the campaign has gained significant momentum through the Addendum on the Prevention and Eradication of Violence against Women and Children, adopted by the SADC Heads of State in 1998. In South Africa, this campaign focuses primarily on generating an increased awareness of the negative impact of violence on women, children, and people with disabilities as well as society as a whole. The campaign has been expanded to include a 365 Days National Action Plan to End Violence against Women, with a specific Action Plan for implementation by various sectors i.e. government, civil society and non-governmental organisations. According to government, the plan seeks to ensure a coordinated, comprehensive and sustainable effort to eliminate the physical, mental or social abuse that is directed against persons because of their sex or gender role in society. Gender-based violence is both a consequence and a cause of gender inequality and, in all its forms, is endemic around the world, cutting across class, race, religion and national borders. This is in keeping with the United Nations’ definition of violence against women, which is any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or mental harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WOMEN, YOUTH AND PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES, MS NONHLANHLA NCUBE-NDABA For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly.Read more