Parliament, Thursday, 28 November 2019 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Health, Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, commends the gains achieved by the Minister of Health and his department to achieve the 90 90 90 strategy through the launch of the new HIV treatment regime. The Minister launched the Tenofovir, Lamivudine and Dolutegravir (TLD) treatment in Ugu district, KwaZulu-Natal, yesterday.
	
	“This is a significant milestone in the treatment of HIV, especially in relation to the benefits the new regimen brings, such as quick suppression of the virus, high genetic barrier to resistance, fewer side effects and smaller tablets, which will make it easier to take. The launch represents a giant leap in ensuring the realisation of the 90 90 90 strategy,” Dr Dhlomo said.
	
	The 90 90 90 strategy is an ambitious treatment strategy to ensure that by 2020, 90% of people living with HIV will know their HIV status, 90% of people with diagnosed HIV infection will receive sustained antiretroviral therapy and 90% people receiving antiretroviral therapy will have viral suppression. The launch of this new treatment regimen, which involves taking one pill, once a day, signifies South Africa’s commitment and progress to end the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
	
	The committee notes that TLD is recommended by the World Health Organisation for first-line treatment and can also be used for second-line treatment of HIV.
	
	However, the committee notes that the new regime has weight gain as a side effect, but believes that this does not supersede its advantages. The committee emphasised that it has always advocated for adoption of a healthy lifestyle, through walking and running, which can assist in minimising the weight gain.
	
	“All South Africans must commit to a healthy lifestyle, especially because of the huge impact this has on the reduction of the non-communicable diseases, like diabetes and hypertension. This is a lifestyle we must all commit to,” Dr Dhlomo said.
	
	The committee calls on the department to roll out a comprehensive communication plan to inform South Africans of the benefits of the new regimen.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, DR SIBONGISENI DHLOMO 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more