Parliament, Thursday, 28 November 2019 – The Select Committee on Security and Justice this week adopted the Independent Police Investigative Directorate Amendment Bill. The purpose of the Bill is to deal with the amendment of Section 6, which refers to the process of the removal of the executive director of the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid). It stems from a Constitutional Court judgement that strengthens the independence of Ipid and provides for the necessary parliamentary oversight. These included the powers of the Minister of Police to take disciplinary steps or to remove the Ipid executive director, among other things. The amendments will provide, among other things, for greater independence of the Ipid executive director and greater certainty on the process of suspending and removing the executive director. Committee Chairperson Ms Shahidabibi Shaikh said the Bill lapsed at the end of the previous Parliament. It was revived in the sixth Parliament in October 2019, on the understanding that the current committee should resume its work at the stage in the process achieved at the end of the previous term. The committee received seven written submissions from five organisations and two individuals. Most of the submissions refer to a process that is broader than the amendments contained in the current Bill before the committee. “The majority of the submissions therefore contain recommendations relating to broader amendment to the Ipid Act as a whole. The committee considered the written submissions amending additional areas of the Ipid Act and noted that while there was a need for a broader review of the Ipid Act,” said Ms Shaikh. “The Bill before the committee currently only seeks to remedy the court-identified unconstitutional provisions of the Ipid Act. The committee therefore agreed to restrict its focus to the remedy sought by the Court.” ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND JUSTICE, MS SHAHIDABIBI SHAIKH For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed.Read more