Parliament, Wednesday, 4 November 2019 – While adopting its report on the 2019 Medium Term Budget Policy Statement yesterday, the Standing Committee on Appropriations (SCoA) highlighted the need for the private sector to enhance its role in economic growth. The committee raised its concerns with the economic impact of retrenchments in the private sector, which not only decreases the disposal income of citizens, but highly impacts on the government’s tax base. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Sfiso Buthelezi, said this becomes especially concerning in companies where the ease of retrenchments comes too easily to executives earning enormous salaries and bonuses at the expense of ordinary workers. The committee is of the view that the austerity measures of government should not be the only medium of debt consolidation and economic growth, but the private sector too needs to play a role. The rising public sector wage bill remains a concern and has once again been a key feature in the 2019 Medium Term Budget Policy Statement. While sharing these concerns, the committee said a comprehensive study on the wider economic impact of the public sector wage bill at all levels of government, including state-owned companies and municipalities should be undertaken by the National Treasury, the Department of Employment and Labour and its relevant stakeholders. The committee raised its concerns with the fiscal risk posed by state-owned companies. To assist in mitigating this, the committee is of the view that Parliament should consider developing a government guarantee oversight model in order to ensure the efficient use of government guarantees to state-owned entities. The committee also adopted its report on the 2019 Adjustments Appropriation Bill. The committee notes and shares stakeholder concerns around the worrying levels of under-expenditure and a failure to achieve key service delivery targets, as well as the wasteful and irregular expenditure in government departments, as highlighted during its public hearings held on Friday, 29 November 2019. The committee is of the view that the National Treasury needs to share with the committee reports on the early warning systems which would allow for early intervention by Parliament’s committees mandated to perform oversight. Mr Buthelezi said “the lack of consequence management has been a constant feature across departments”, the committee will therefore request the National Treasury to provide a list of repeat offenders as a way of dealing with problematic departments. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS, MR SFISO BUTHELEZI. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact: Name: Felicia Lombard
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more