Parliament, Wednesday, 6 November 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration today met to complete the interview process for the filling of the post of Commissioner for the National Public Service Commission (PSC). The Public Service Commission is an independent institution established in terms of Chapter 10 of the Constitution, 1996. The Constitution stipulates that there is a single PSC for the Republic of South Africa, which consist of 14 commissioners. Section 196 (7)(a) of the Constitution stipulates that five commissioners are approved by the National Assembly in accordance with subsection (8)(a). Section 196(10) states that a commissioner is appointed for a term of five years, which is renewable for one additional term only.
	
	The committee received 172 applicants and these were screened and shortlisted to 9 candidates, who were invited for interviews.
	
	The following are the candidates interviewed over three days. On 31 October 2019, the subcommittee interviewed five candidates, three candidates on 1 November 2019 and only one candidate on 6 November 2019. Ms Zukiswa Mqolomba,
	Ms Nomazala Caith Mninzi,
	Dr Fhumulani Munyai,
	Ms Nomonde Patience Keswa,
	Mr Dizline Mfanozelwe Shozi,
	Ms Zanele Isabella Hlatshwayo,
	Mr Kevin Sifiso Malunga,
	Mr Tsepo Phillip Kgwathisi, and
	Ms Rashika Bosch
	
	The committee will meet next week to deliberate and finalise the successful candidate.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION, MR T.M. JAMES
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns.Read more