Parliament, Thursday, 21 November 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration yesterday met to complete the process for the filling of the post of Commissioner for the Public Service Commission (PSC).
	
	The Public Service Commission is an independent institution established in terms of Chapter 10 of the Constitution, 1996. The Constitution stipulates that there is a single PSC for the Republic of South Africa, consisting of 14 commissioners. Section 196 (7)(a) of the Constitution stipulates that five commissioners are approved by the National Assembly in accordance with subsection (8)(a). Section 196(10) states that a commissioner is appointed for a term of five years, which is renewable for one additional term only.
	
	The Committee received 172 applicants, and these were screened and shortlisted to nine candidates who were invited for interviews. The following candidates were interviewed over three days. The subcommittee interviewed five candidates on 31 October 2019, three candidates on 1 November 2019 and only one candidate on 6 November 2019. The committee deliberated further on the following four candidates and agreed on the successful candidate for the position of Commissioner for the Public Service Commission.
	
	1) Ms Zanele Isabella Hlatshwayo,
	2) Ms Zukiswa Mqolomba,
	3) Ms Rashika Bosch, and
	4) Mr Kevin Sifiso Malunga
	
	The sub-committee forwarded the name of Ms Zanele Isabella Hlatshwayo to the Portfolio Committee of Public Service and Administration as the preferred candidate, with the exception of the Democratic Alliance, which did not agree with the recommended candidate. The name of the preferred candidate will be forwarded to the Office of the President of South Africa for ratification.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION, MR T.M JAMES
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”.Read more