Parliament, Sunday 24 November 2019 – Public Hearings on the National Health insurance Bill (NHI) by the Portfolio Committee on Health, House plenaries for the National Assembly (NA) and National Council of Provinces (NCOP), consideration of Bills and Committee Meetings are some of the many important issues scheduled for this week.
	
	Today (Sunday 24 November 2019), the Portfolio Committee on Health will continue with its Public hearings in KwaZulu-Natal, at the Harry Gwala district, Umzimkhulu. The hearings will be held at the Clydesdale Community Hall from 10:00 to 15:00 and tomorrow, Monday 25 November, and move to Endumeni Local Municipality, Glencoe Town Hall, from 15:00 to 19:30.
	
	So far, three (3) provinces have been visited by the Committee, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape and Limpopo. The Eastern Cape is next in line to be visited on Friday, 29 November. The NHI is the financing system that will ensure all South African citizens and legal long-term residents are provided with quality healthcare services, regardless of their employment status and ability to make a direct monetary contribution to the NHI Fund. It seeks to provide universal health care services, as a key equalising intervention in one of the world’s most unequal societies, South Africa.
	
	On Tuesday, 26 November, at the NA plenary sitting at 14:00, the Standing Committee on Finance reports on Monetary Bills will be considered. The Bills are the Rates and Monetary Amounts and Amendment of Revenue Laws Bill; Taxation Laws Amendment Bill; and Tax Administration Laws Amendment Bill. Also, high on the agenda, is a debate on an issue of national importance: “The strike action at South African Airways and the implications thereof on the economy”.
	
	Meanwhile, the NCOP at its sitting will consider two (2) reports: the Provincial Week report and the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Water and Sanitation and Human Settlements report on the Notice of Intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of the Constitution, 1996 in Fetakgomo Tubase Local Municipality, Limpopo Province.
	
	The Economics Cluster 4B and D, comprising of Departments of Trade and Industry; Employment and Labour; Tourism; and Finance will appear before the NCOP to respond to questions on Wednesday, 27 November at 14:00. The Division of Revenue Bill is also scheduled to be considered on the day.
	
	The NA’s agenda on the other hand also includes responses to questions from the Governance Cluster. This Cluster is comprised of the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs; Minister in the Presidency; Minister in the Presidency for Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities and Public Service and Administration.
	
	Questions for the oral reply by various government departments and their entities is one of the mechanisms in which Parliament is holding the executive accountable to the electorate.
	
	There will be a joint Programming Committee on Thursday, 28 November for the two Houses of Parliament. The Programming Committee seeks to develop and agree on the programme of action of both Houses. At 14:00 the NA will engage in a strategic planning session whilst the NCOP’s Permanent Delegates will receive a briefing from the Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy on the Integrated Resource Plan in the Old Assembly Chamber.
	
	There are about 20 Committee meetings scheduled this week.
	
	TUESDAY, 26 NOVEMBER:
	Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs: Briefing by the Department of Home Affairs on the strategies to resolve long queues at Home Affairs offices
	
	Portfolio Committee on Basic Education: Briefing and engagement on a submission of the Griqua People’s Heritage. Scheduled to participate are representatives of the Griqua People’s Heritage, Northern Cape Department of Education, and the Department of Basic Education. The committee will also be briefed by the Department of Basic Education on the state of readiness for 2020 academic year.
	
	Select Committee on Health and Social Services: Briefing by the South African Social Security Agency (SASSA) on its 2018/2019 Annual Report.
	
	Portfolio Committee on Communications: Briefing by the State Information Technology Agency (SITA) on its financial statements, governance and operational challenges, as well as its action plan to respond to matters raised by the Auditor-General.
	
	Portfolio Committee on Social Development: Briefing by the South African Social Security Agency (SASSA) and National Development Agency (NDA) on their first and second term quarterly financial and non-financial performance report for 2019/20 financial year (April – September 2019)].
	
	WEDNESDAY, 27 NOVEMBER:
	Portfolio Committee on Police: Briefing by the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (IPID) on progress made in dealing with on the Internal Dockets Investigation conducted on case closed under “special closure”.
	
	Portfolio Committee on Small Business Development: Briefing on the 2019/20 Revised Annual Performance Plans of the Department of Small Business Development and its entities, the Small Enterprise Development Agency (seda) and the Small Enterprise Finance Agency (sefa).
	
	Select Committee on Public Enterprises and Communication: Briefing by Transnet on the financial stability of the company and on alleged wasteful and irregular expenditures, as well as on investigations.
	
	Select Committee on Education and Technology, Sports, Arts and Culture: Briefing by the Pan South African Language Board (PanSALB) and Iziko Museum on their 2018/19 Annual Report.
	
	Select Committee on Transport, Public Service and Administration, Public Works and Infrastructure: Briefing by the South African National Road Agency Limited (SANRAL) on its Annual Report.
	
	Portfolio Committee on Social Development: Briefing by the Council of Social Services Professions on its funding support from the Department of Social Department and challenges pertaining to training, professionalization of social work practitioners and their conditions of employment.
	
	Select Committee on Security and Justice: – The Department of Justice will reply to written submissions on the Promotion of Access to Information Amendment Bill. The Department of Justice together with the South African Police Services (SAPS) and National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) will reply to written submissions on the Cybercrimes Bill [B6B-2017].
	
	Select Committee on Finance: Briefing by National Treasury on the Tax bills and consideration of further submissions and deliberation.
	
	THURSDAY, 28 NOVEMBER:
	Joint Standing Committee on Defence, (National Assembly and National Council of Provinces): Briefing by Chief of Defence Reserves and Chairperson of the Reserve Force Council on the mandate, challenges and achievements, as well as the outcome of the Reserve Force Indaba.
	
	FRIDAY, 29 NOVEMBER:
	Select Committee on Security and Justice: Consideration and Adoption of the Promotion of Access to Information Amendment Bill.
	
	For the latest full schedule of committee meetings (updated regularly), please click:
	https://www.parliament.gov.za/whatson
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly.Read more