Parliament, Wednesday, 27 November 2019 – The Chairperson the Multi-Party Women’s Caucus (MPWC), has condemned the killing of Limpopo student, Ms Precious Ramabulana.
	
	According to reports, Ms Ramabulana suffered 52 multiple-stab wounds in her rented flat. The motive for the crime has not been established. “We urge the Minister of Police and his team to intensify the search and arrest this monster,” said Committee Chairperson, Ms Kate Bilankulu.
	
	Ms Bilankulu, said violence against women and children is a societal problem that we must tackle together as men and women, and as government and civil society. “We advocate for the implementation of coordinated, comprehensive and effective programmes aimed at the elimination of violence where all relevant stakeholders play a crucial role according to their respective mandates.
	
	“As MPWC, we are sick and tired of collaborations, we want action now! The justice system needs to be reviewed and harsh sentences meted out, something which the President spoke about. It should be implemented expeditiously. Women of South Africa must stand side by side with their girl children and save the nation.”
	
	As the MPWC, we are committed in lobbying and advocating for full implementation of the Declaration of the Presidential Summit against gender-based violence and femicide (GBVF). We support the Interim Steering Committee on GBVF and we will support them in the execution of their mandate. We will also be conducting educational programmes for rural communities about violence against women and children.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE MULTI-PARTY WOMEN’S CAUCUS, MS KATE BILANKULU.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed.Read more