Parliament, Sunday, 10 November 2019 – A visit by the Springboks to Parliament, condolences for former President of Zimbabwe Robert Mugabe and another round of Public Hearings on the National Health Insurance (NHI) Bill by the Portfolio Committee on Health are some of the activities scheduled on Parliament’s programme this week.
	
	On Monday, the Springboks will pay a visit to Parliament as part of their national parade tour after winning the Rugby World Cup in Yokohama, Japan against England last Saturday. On the same day, officials from the United Kingdom Parliament will also be visiting to share best practices on oversight and information (content and research) support to Members of Parliament, committee management and legislative processes between the two Parliaments.
	
	Oral questions to Cluster 4D- Economics Ministers which are Ministers of Public Enterprises, Finance and Small Business Development are scheduled in the National Council of Provinces on Tuesday, 12 November. Meanwhile, the NA members will be delivering tribute messages to the Springboks followed by condolences for former President of Zimbabwe Robert Mugabe. There will also be consideration of the Budgetary Review and Recommendation Reports (BRRR) of Portfolio Committees on Employment and Labour, Home Affairs, Communications, Transport and Health.
	
	On Wednesday, 13 November Cluster 1: Peace and Security Ministers which comprises of Ministers of Defence and Military Veterans, Home Affairs, International Relations and Cooperation, Justice and Correctional Services, Police and State Security will be answering questions in the NA. Both Houses will also on the same day consider the report on the Revised Fiscal Framework and Revenue Proposals.
	
	The National Assembly will again this week continue with mini-plenaries on Thursday. The debate which is scheduled to take place in the NA chamber will discuss “the escalation in violent crimes in South Africa and the government’s responsibility to protect its citizens’ lives and their property while the one scheduled in the Old Assembly Chamber will discuss “combating increasing levels of violence, drugs and sexual abuse in schools.”
	
	The third round of Public Hearings on the National Health Insurance (NHI) Bill by the Portfolio Committee on Health will start in Limpopo province, Vhembe District Municipality on Friday, 15 November. The hearings will proceed to Greater Tzaneen (Saturday, 16 November), Sekhukhune District Municipality (Sunday, 17 November) and finish off in Capricorn District Municipality (Monday, 18 November). The objective of the NHI Bill is to achieve universal access to quality health care services in South Africa as per section 27 of the Constitution; to establish a National Health Insurance Fund as well as to set out its powers, functions and governance structures.
	
	Amongst parliamentary committee meetings scheduled, the interview for the Deputy Public Protector to be conducted by the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services is on Tuesday, 12 November and on Wednesday, 13 November 8, 2019.
	
	Joint Standing Committee on the Financial Management of Parliament will on Thursday (14 November 2019) consider and adopt the Committee’s report on Parliament’s performance in the 2018/19 financial year and will also receive briefing by the Secretary to Parliament on the institution’s performance in the first half of the 2019/20 financial year and on Parliament’s revised budget.
	
	THERE ARE 36 COMMITTEE MEETINGS SCHEDULED THIS WEEK:
	
	TUESDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2019 
	Portfolio Committee on Basic Education: Briefing by the Department of Basic Education on Funza Lushaka Bursary Scheme
	Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation: Briefing by the Department of Water and Sanitation on its turnaround strategy in dealing with poor financial and non-financial performance over the year and on how is it resolving challenges on War on Leaks project.
	Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs: Briefing by the Municipal Demarcation Board on the delimitation of the municipal wards in preparation of the 2021 Municipal Elections
	Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities: Briefing by the A on progress made with regards to the implementation of the recommendations of the AGSA for 2018/19.
	Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy: Briefing by the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy on the Basic Fuel Price.
	
	WEDNESDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2019 
	Portfolio Committee on Small Business Development: Trilateral meeting of the Portfolio Committees of Small Business Development, Home Affairs and Employment and Labour on the recent attack and looting of foreign and South African owned businesses.
	Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Technology: Briefing by the Technology Innovation Agency (TIA) on Annual Report 2018/19 and Briefing by the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) on Annual Report 2018/19.
	Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans: Briefing by the Parliamentary Legal Adviser on the independence of the Office of the Military Ombud.
	Portfolio Committee on Social Development: Briefing by the Department of Social Development on the Social Assistance Amendment Bill; Briefing by the Department of Social Development on its action plan to respond to the Auditor General’s audit findings for 2018/19 annual report and BRRR
	Select Committee on Transport, Public Service and Administration, Public Works and Infrastructure: Briefing by the Independent Development Trust on its Annual Report
	Joint Meeting: Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy and Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises: Briefing by the Department of Public Enterprises on the Eskom Special paper and the impact of the Integrated Resource Plan on Eskom.
	
	THURSDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 2019 
	Select Committee on Appropriations: Presentation by National Treasury on the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill.
	
	FRIDAY, 15 NOVEMBER 2019 
	Select Committee on Appropriations: Presentation by South African Local Government Association (Salga) on the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill
	
	PUBLIC HEARINGS THIS WEEK:
	
	Portfolio Committee on Health is currently holding its third round of public hearings on the National Health Insurance (NHI) Bill in Limpopo province (15 to 18 November 2019).
	Select Committee on Security and Justice will hold public hearings on the Cybercrimes Bill on Tuesday, 12 November and Wednesday, 13 November 2019.
	
	For a full list of the Committees, visit Parliament’s website www.parliament.gov.za
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more