Parliament, Thursday, 14 November 2019 – Parliament urges Members of Parliament, parliamentary employees and stakeholders to participate in the latest Stakeholder Satisfaction Survey that is currently underway. The survey is conducted by an independent research agency, Mthente Research and Consulting Services (Pty) Ltd. It is part of Parliament’s monitoring and evaluation instruments that are used to assess the scope, reach and impact of Parliament’s service delivery to internal and external stakeholders. This provides critical evidence on a range of aspects of Parliament’s service delivery model, to enable evidence-based interventions to improve areas of concern, sustain positive patterns and introduce new services where required. The stakeholder satisfaction survey is one of two research projects used to assess the impact of Parliament’s service delivery, communication and stakeholder engagement programmes. The other is the public perceptions survey commissioned to IPSOS. Both surveys enable stakeholders and the public to share their views and make suggestions on how Parliament can serve them better. Online questionnaires are being sent to both internal and external stakeholders that include state and non-state structures such government departments, research and advocacy organisations, academic institutions, non-governmental and faith-based organisations, the media, business and trade unions. The survey’s results will be presented before the end of the financial year, in a report with recommendations on how Parliament could further improve stakeholder satisfaction levels with the quantity, quality, timing, frequency and other dimensions of its bouquet of service packages that are aimed at meeting internal and external stakeholder needs and expectations. The Acting Secretary to Parliament Ms Baby Tyawa says: “Spare us about 10 minutes to complete and submit your questionnaire immediately, to help us improve the functioning of your Parliament and ensure it is more capacitated to serve your needs better” The survey has its roots in the fifth democratic Parliament, which adopted an outcomes-based approach to the design, execution, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of its programmes. The commitment to progressively improve the satisfaction of stakeholders with Parliament’s engagements and services was included in the institution’s Annual Performance Plan. It was based on, among other things, the constitutional imperative to promote citizen and stakeholder participation in all its work of making laws, providing executive oversight, considering and approving plans and budgets of state institutions, as well as being a public platform for discussion and consideration on matters of great importance to all people in South Africa. The hyperlinks to questionnaires for all three categories of respondents are outlined hereunder. Kindly choose the one appropriate to you, complete and submit at your earliest convenience: EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS' SATISFACTION SURVEY:
	https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/FT7R7Y3
	INTERNAL SATISFACTION SURVEY – EMPLOYEES:
	https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/FMZNS5L
	MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT SATISFACTION SURVEY:
	https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/FXGHKL8 Parliament thanks you in anticipation of your positive response and participation. Queries may be addressed to Mthente Research and Consulting Services at heidi@mthente.co.za / +27 21 674 0504 / +27 76 227 3856. Alternatively, contact Ms Ilana Mthethwa at 021-403 2460 /imthethwa@parliament.gov.za ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party.Read more