Parliament, Tuesday, 12 November 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services today commenced with interviews for the Deputy Public Protector position which will become vacant next month.
	
	The committee received 29 applications/nominations of which three withdrew before the shortlisting process. A total of eight candidates were shortlisted for interviews, but one withdrew after this.
	
	Today the candidates were Adv Shadrack Nkuna, Mr Buang Jones, Adv Moshoeshoe Moshoeshoe and Adv Noxolo Mbangeni.
	
	Questions to the candidates include: How do they understand the concept of rule of law and that of due process? How will they address possible conflict between the Deputy Public Protector (DPP) and the Public Protector (PP) and the roles regarding responsibilities given the DPP? Question of neutrality, decisions free from political bias were also raised with the candidates.
	
	Committee Chairperson, Mr Bulelani Magwanishe, said the committee will expedite the process and aims to recommend a candidate for the position before Parliament rises for its annual recess next month, in order for the National Assembly to adopt its decision.
	
	The Deputy Public Protector is appointed by the President on the recommendation of the National Assembly for such a period as the President may determine at the time of such appointment, but not exceeding seven years. The Deputy Public Protector may at the end of his or her term, be reappointed for one additional term.
	
	The person recommended for appointment as Deputy Public Protector must be a South African citizen, who is a fit and proper person to hold such office, and who: The interviews will continue tomorrow with Adv Lwazi Kubukeli, Adv Puleng Matshelo and Adv Kholeka Gcaleka. Details for tomorrow’s meeting are as follows: 
	Date: Wednesday, 13 November 2019
	Time: 9.30 am
	Venue: Old Assembly Chamber, Ground Floor, Old Assembly Building. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, MR BULELANI MAGWANISHE. For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more