Parliament, Friday, 29 November 2019 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation, Ms Machwene Semenya, welcomes the launch of the Water and Sanitation Master Plan which will give a blueprint on how to manage water which is a very critical resource. Parliament’s previous committees on water and sanitation relentlessly called for the existence of a clear plan to guide the various spheres of government on how to use water in a responsible way. The committee welcomes the collaboration between the government departments of water and sanitation and public works and infrastructure in the roll out of this plan which is critical especially to remove the silo mentality that has firm roots in government. Furthermore, the collaboration will assist in dealing with many other challenges within the sector that include dilapidated and inadequate reticulation infrastructure. The committee looks at the plan in a broader context, it looks at it as a tool that will also be used as a catalyst in the use of water for both social and economic development purposes. The pillars of the plan include plans to eliminate wastages and loss of water due to corruption and mismanagement. The plan ensures that there is a capable leadership within the department and capacitation of leadership at local municipality level. Above all, the committee is optimistic that the plan will go a long way in reversing the challenges around water the country has faced recently. The cumbersome and unnecessarily long processes that stand on the way of acquiring licences to use water, have for some time compromised the economic benefit of water. The committee appreciates the announcement that the process will now be executed within 50 days. “We are hopeful that this announcement will help unlock the many economic opportunities available within the country which will contribute to job creation,” Ms Semenya said. The commitment which has been made on the maintenance of infrastructure within the water sector at all levels of government is also commended. Also, the revitalisation of the Blue and Green drop monitoring mechanisms is welcomed by the committee as this forms the basis for ensuring the quality of water in our country. While the committee acknowledges the good work done in developing the plan, it has emphasised that there should be stronger emphasis on its implementation. “Good plans alone will not save the country from this quagmire. We need strong and credible leaders to assist the Minister in fully implementing this plan,” Ms Semenya emphasised. The plan which was launched recently in Tshwane by the Minister of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation, Ms Lindiwe Sisulu aims at addressing the country’s water crisis. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HUMAN SETTLEMENTS, WATER AND SANITATION, MS MACHWENE SEMENYA For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns.Read more