Parliament, Thursday, 28 November 2019 - The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Technology engaged with the Tshwane University of Technology at Parliament yesterday to look at the allegations of corruption, maladministration, nepotism and abuse of power levelled by various university stakeholders at the university.
	
	The committee received a detailed response from the university on all the allegations raised, and the assurance by the Minister of Higher Education, Science and Technolgy, Minister Blade Nzimande that the department has also received these allegations and dealt with some of them.
	
	The committee welcomes the assurance by the Minister that the department has investigated some of the allegations and is satisfied that there is no substance to some of them. In this regard, the committee welcomed the Minister's commitment to comprehensively brief it on the outcomes of the departmental investigation.
	
	However, the committee is gravely concerned about the serious allegations concerning the university’s business arms, i.e, TUT Enterprise Holding and is not satisfied with the explanation provided by the university. The committee calls for an independent and thorough investigations on these allegations. It is particularly worried about the allegations concerning the leasing of the student accommodation and other responsibilities delegated to the business entity. "We believe that an independent investigation is in the public interest to restore the trust and confidence of the public and all the stakeholders in this business entity," said Mr Philly Mapulane, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	The committee is of the view that the university council did not follow due process, including complying with the principles of the Audi alteram partem, in the dismissal of Ms Veronica Motloutsi as a member of the council and therefore the committee calls on the university council to reinstate her with immediate effect.
	
	"We take serious exception on the absence of NEHAWU in the meeting to present the complaints they raised with the committee. The squabbling by various NEHAWU leaders present today in the meeting is very unfortunate and a bad reflection on one of the biggest public sector unions of COSATU. The fundamental question to be posed is, in whose interest is NEHAWU behaving in this disgraceful manner?" asked Mr Mapulane.
	
	He added: “Our general observation is that some of the issues brought to our attention can best be dealt with by all the stakeholders in the university and what is required is for the leadership of the university to open up space for more dialogue among the various stakeholders. We further urge the Vice Chancellor and his team to serve this prestigious people’s institution with humility.”
	
	The committee will engage the university further on these matters in the new year when it will be visiting the university on an official oversight programme during the registration and reopening for the 2020 academic year.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, MR PHILL MAPULANE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr) 
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa.Read more