Parliament, Tuesday 26 November 2019 – The National Assembly passed three Taxation Bills at its plenary sitting this afternoon and they will now be sent to the National Council of Provinces for concurrence.
	
	They are the: The Bills were part of Minister of Finance Mr Tito Mboweni’s Budget announcements on 20 February. The May national elections, which established a new executive and a new national legislature, meant that the sixth democratic Parliament will now consider the Bills.
	
	The Rates and Monetary Amounts and Amendment of Revenue Laws Bill deals with changes in rates and monetary thresholds, changes to personal income tax tables, increases of excise duties on alcohol and tobacco and adjustments to the eligible income bands that qualify for the employment tax incentive.
	
	In its report on this Bill, the Standing Committee on Finance agreed with National Treasury and the South African Revenue Services (SARS) that the increase in illicit products was because of weak law enforcement and tax administration challenges at SARS.
	
	The Committee undertook to focus more on monitoring law enforcement measures on illicit tobacco trade and on SARS’ capacity and called on government to speed up its work of taxing other tobacco products, such as, electronic cigarettes and tobacco heating products.
	
	On personal income tax, the Bill proposals are aimed at raising an extra R12,8 billion – by increasing the primary rebate, which affected tax-free rebates. Most relief from the 1.1% increase in primary rebates will go to lower-income groups. There is also no increase in medical tax credits – to assist funding of National Health Insurance and to provide extra tax revenue.
	
	The Taxation Laws Amendment Bill proposals affect individual savings and employment tax, business tax, Value Added Tax and the Customs and Excise Act.
	
	A key proposal is an amendment to the tax treatment of surviving spouses’ pension. The amendment seeks to lessen the financial burden when calculating taxes, which retirement funds may withhold on spousal pensions. The amendment becomes effective on 1 March 2021. The original effective date, 1 March 2020, has been postponed for administrative reasons, to enable SARS and taxpayers to ready their systems for the changes.
	
	The Bill also proposes a review of the allowable deduction for investors in the Venture Capital Companies (VCC) tax incentive scheme. The Bill distinguishes between deduction amounts of natural persons (including trusts) – set at R2.5 million a year – and corporate investors – set at R5 million a year.
	
	The VCC incentive scheme was introduced through section 12J of the Income Tax Act, 1962, in 2008. It aimed to raise equity funding to support development of small businesses, which would not have had access to market funding because of size or inherent risk.
	
	It allowed investors an upfront tax deduction, equivalent to expenses incurred in acquiring shares in a VCC. The deduction would be reversed and included as a recoupment in a taxpayer’s income if a taxpayer disposed of shares in a VCC within five years of acquiring them.
	
	Changes made to the VCC scheme in 2015 – to broaden it and increase uptake – resulted in high-net worth individuals and companies disproportionately investing in VCCs to reduce their taxable income.
	
	The Standing Committee on Finance, in its report recommending that the National Assembly approve the Bill, calls on National Treasury and SARS to conduct a study to establish whether the VCC scheme is achieving its objectives.
	
	The Bill also refines the Employment Incentive Scheme, to align it with the National Minimum Wage Act of 2018. The scheme, introduced in January 2014, aims to reduce the cost of hiring young people (18 to 29 years old) without work experience through a cost-sharing mechanism with government.
	
	As with the VCC scheme, the Standing Committee on Finance, has called for Treasury and SARS to conduct a study on this scheme to gauge its successes and challenges.
	
	The Tax Administration Laws Amendment Bill – the third Bill passed today – was formally introduced on 30 October, when Minister Mboweni presented the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement.
	
	This Bill makes technical corrections to the Income Tax Act, 1962; the Customs and Excise Act, 1964; the Value Added Tax Act, 1991; the Skills Development Levies Act, 1999; the Unemployment Insurance Contributions Act, 2002 (to align time periods for a refund under this Act to the Tax Administration Act of 2011); and the Tax Administration Act, 2011.
	
	Parliament’s Standing and Select Committees on Finance held public hearings on the Bills and interacted with National Treasury and SARS on public submissions received on them during September.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping.Read more