Parliament, Wednesday, 13 November 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services today concluded their interviews for the Deputy Public Protector position, which will become vacant next month.
	
	The committee received 29 applications/nominations, of which three withdrew before the shortlisting process. A total of eight candidates were shortlisted for interviews, but one withdrew after this.
	
	Today the candidates were Adv Lwazi Kubukeli, Adv Puleng Matshelo and Adv Kholeka Gcaleka.
	
	Questions to the candidates included: How do they understand the concept of rule of law and that of due process? How will they address possible conflict between the Deputy Public Protector (DPP) and the Public Protector (PP) and the roles regarding responsibilities given the DPP? Question of neutrality, decisions free from political bias were also raised with the candidates.
	
	Committee Chairperson Mr Bulelani Magwanishe said the committee’s intention is to recommend a candidate to the National Assembly before it adjourns on 6 December 2019.
	
	The Deputy Public Protector is appointed by the President on the recommendation of the National Assembly for such a period as the President may determine at the time of such appointment, but not exceeding seven years. The Deputy Public Protector may at the end of his or her term, be reappointed for one additional term. The person recommended for appointment as Deputy Public Protector must be a South African citizen, who is a fit and proper person to hold such office.
	
	Mr Magwanishe thanked all candidates for putting themselves forward and wanting to serve the nation. The screening committee has not finalised its work in vetting candidates. The committee can only start its deliberations once this process has been completed, possibly next week.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, MR BULELANI MAGWANISHE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament.Read more