Parliament, Monday, 18 November 2019 – The National Health Insurance (NHI) Bill has been overwhelmingly welcomed in the Limpopo province. The support on the Bill was shown by the people during the public hearings on the Bill that took place in the four districts of Limpopo, Vhembe, Mopani, Sekhukhune and Capricon districts.
	
	The hearings that first took place in the Vhembe district last Friday, 15 November were concluded today at the Capricon district, in Polokwane.
	
	The residents of the Capricon district highlighted similar issues in their oral submissions like the residents of the Vhembe, Mopani and Sekhukhuni districts. They told the committee that they hoped that the NHI will address the existing gap between the rich and poor people.
	
	They urged the committee to ensure that the management of the NHI Fund is tightened to prevent the fund from the monster of corruption. They also called upon the committee to ensure that there are strong measures in place to make the NHI inaccessible to the undocumented foreigners.
	
	The committee told the residents that it will consider all the submissions on the Bill after the process of public hearings has been concluded in all the nine provinces.
	
	Limpopo was the third province where the committee conducted public hearings on the Bill after Mpumalanga and Northern Cape provinces. The fourth province will be KwaZulu-Natal which will be followed by the Eastern Cape province before Parliament rises for the December holiday.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, DR SIBONGISENI DHLOMO
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 344 8184
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov. The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”.Read more