Parliament, Wednesday, 20 November 2019 – The Standing Committee on Auditor-General (SCOAG) is concerned with the picture that is painted by the 2018 – 2019 audit results of the national and provincial governments that were presented by the Auditor-General of South Africa today.
	
	It is very concerning that irregular expenditure has increased from R51 billion in the previous financial year to R62 billion. The committee understands that this figure could even be higher due to the fact that some contracts could not be audited due to missing information. This, according to the committee, shows that there is a lack of adherence to the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) and in some cases possible financial mismanagement by those who have been entrusted to manage the public purse. The committee is also concerned with the increase in fruitless and wasteful expenditure.
	
	The committe said that an increase in irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure is not something that should be taken lightly and is not acceptable. Furthermore, the committee said the country should be seeing a decrease in these kinds of expenditures. The AG paints a bleak picture by these results at a time when the country should be prudent in how it spends the tax payers’ money. The committee hopes that institutions that are tasked with holding the national and provincial governments accountable will be able to tackle the root causes that lead to these kind of results so that the country can eventually see a decline in irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL, MR SAKHUMZI SOMYO.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more