Parliament, Sunday 30 June 2019 – A total of 33 oversight committees of the National Assembly and joint committees of both Houses, the National Assembly and National Council of Provinces, are scheduled to meet for the first time this week to elect their chairpersons. Oversight committees of Parliament consist of 11 members – six from the African National Congress, two from the Democratic Alliance, one from the Economic Freedom Fighters and two from other parties. The meetings to elect chairpersons have been scheduled in four different, mostly hour-long, time slots on Tuesday. Ten committees are scheduled to meet from 9.30 to 10.30. These are the Portfolio Committees on Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development; Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs; Employment and Labour; Home Affairs; Justice and Correctional Services; Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities; Public Works and Infrastructure; Sports, Arts and Culture; Transport; and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. Nine committees are scheduled to meet from 10.30 to 11.30. These are the Portfolio Committees on Basic Education; Defence and Military Veterans; Health; Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation; Mineral Resources and Energy; Public Enterprises; Small Business Development; Tourism; and the Standing Committee on Finance. One committee – the Standing Committee on the Auditor General – is scheduled to meet from 10.30 to 11.00. Eleven committees are scheduled to meet from 11.30 to 12.30. They are the Portfolio Committees on Communications; Environment, Forestry and Fisheries; Higher Education, Science and Technology; International Relations and Co-operation; Police; Public Service and Administration; Social Development; Trade and Industry, the Standing Committee on Appropriations; the Joint Standing Committee on Defence; and the Constitutional Review Committee. Two committees are scheduled to meet from 13.00 to 14.00. These are the Joint Standing Committee on the Financial Management of Parliament and the Multi-Party Women’s Caucus. On Wednesday, the National Council of Provinces’ Select Committee on Trade and Industry, Economic Development, Small Business Development, Tourism, Employment and Labour is scheduled to meet to consider and adopt a programme for the committee and to receive a presentation on the committee’s legacy report. The 11 Select Committees held first meetings on 26 June to elect their chairpersons. There are no plenary sittings of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces this week. A joint programme committee meeting of the two Houses is scheduled for 10.00 on Wednesday to consider Parliament’s programme for the rest of the year. On Thursday, the National Assembly Programme Committee will meet to attend to the specific programme of the National Assembly. The National Council of Provinces Programme Committee is also scheduled to do the same, also at 8.30 on Thursday. For the latest full schedule of committee meetings (updated regularly), please click:https://www.parliament.gov.za/whatson ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them.Read more