Parliament, Wednesday, 28 August 2019 – The Select Committee on Public Enterprises and Communications was briefed today by the South African Broadcasting Cooperation (SABC) on its financial sustainability and human resources issues. Deputy Minister for Communications and Digital Technologies, Ms Pinky Kekana, said the SABC has a provincial footprint and so it is important that the committee is also briefed on the state of affairs in the provinces. “Whatever happens in head office brings unintended consequences in the provincial setup,” said Ms Kekana. She added that it is common knowledge that the department and the SABC has experienced challenges. The biggest issues are financial sustainability, human resources and governance. “We can confidently say Parliament was able to stabilise governance, as we have a fully functional board.” Briefing the committee, the SABC said it ended the financial year 2018/19 with an unaudited loss for the year of R483 million. The SABC is technically insolvent and cash flow is depleted. Therefore, the SABC cannot honor payments to service providers, or honour its contracts in commissioning local content. The crisis in the SABC is a matter of urgency. Furthermore, the SABC placed a moratorium on recruitment from September 2018. This reduced the headcount of the organisation considerably and has hampered operations. The Minister has engaged the Minister of Finance on this issue and awaiting feedback on the issue, Ms Kekana said. There is ongoing engagement with National Treasury (NT) and the Government Technical Advisory Centre (GTAC) with regard to the pre-set conditions which the national broadcaster must fulfil before any funding is processed. The GTAC is an entity that assists government entities with their turnaround strategies. The committee expressed concern about the state of affairs at the SABC, but welcomed the presentation for its detail and frankness. The committee said the engagement with the SABC is to assist in finding solutions to the SABC’s problems. On the turnaround strategy, the committee questioned how long it will it take for it to yield results. Group Executive Mr Madoda Mxakwe said the turnaround strategy is hampered by lack of funds. However, 18 to 24 months should show some improvements and he assured the committee that the turnaround plan will work, as the SABC would not be operating today without it. The committee also queried the SABC’s reliance on commercial advertising and was told that the SABC believes its funding model should be reviewed. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES AND COMMUNICATIONS, MR TSHITEREKE MATIBE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu 
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more