Parliament, Friday, 30 August 2019 - The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy has warned about imminent energy crisis in South Africa, if nothing is done, as a matter of urgency, to turn things around. This after the Central Energy Fund (CEF) which is a group of companies with five subsidiaries has briefed the committee on Friday about the eminent crisis facing PetroSA with regard to the indigenous feedstock depletion by 2020. The subsidiaries are PetroSA, Petroleum Agency of South Africa, Energy Projects Division, African Exploration Mining and Finance Corporation, iGas and Strategic Fuel Fund. Each subsidiary has a board which accounts to the main board of the CEF. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Sahlulele Luzipo, said that he is concerned about the fact that a multi-layered board could be responsible for a slow decision-making which is not a sustainable business practice in a competitive environment. It is against this backdrop that the committee strongly believes that PetroSA should be empowered to become a strategic standalone oil and gas company. Another issue of great concern to the committee with regard to the CEF and its subsidiaries as well as other entities under the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy is the fact that many senior officials are appointed on an acting capacity. “This is dangerous for the country because there is an extent at which a person in an acting capacity can take decisive decisions. The exercise is also costly,” said Mr Luzipo. The committee will convene an extremely urgent meeting within the next two weeks with the CEF to discuss further on a number of issues, including access to market, turnaround strategy, the strategic nature of some entities, legislative alignment and collaborations. Furthermore, the committee has expressed a view similar to that of Minister Gwede Mantashe, saying that government cannot afford to abolish coal power all at once. It believes that although the country should be moving towards renewable energy in line with the international treaties, to mitigate for climate change, coal should still be regarded as part of the integrated resource strategy. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY, MR SAHLULELE LUZIPO. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more