The Portfolio Committee of Basic Education today met with the South African Council for Educators (SACE) and the Council for Quality Assurance in General and Further Education and Training (Umalusi) on their annual performance plans. The committee heard that a total of 636 cases of teacher misconduct were reported for the 2018/19 financial year, compared with 509 in the previous financial year. The bulk of these cases were reported in the Western Cape. Between 2014 to 2019, 1 109 cases of teacher misconduct were reported in the Western Cape alone. The next highest number of reported cases was 363 over the same period in KwaZulu-Natal. Northern Cape had the lowest number with 16. The committee heard that these figures may point to a high rate of misconduct in the provinces in question, but equally it may also point out to a culture of reporting in those provinces. From the presentation it further appears that the bulk of the misconduct cases, 295 of them, relate to case of corporal punishment and assault. This is followed by 141 verbal abuse, victimisation, harassment and defamation cases, and the same number of reported cases of improper conduct, the use of improper language, alcohol abuse, absenteeism and insubordination. In response to a question by committee member Ms Desire van der Walt, SACE informed the committee that it currently relies on the South African Police Services to provide security clearance for educators. From January to June this year, 43 educators with offences on their police clearance certificate were highlighted. This included 15 for theft, 11 for assault, nine for driving under the influence of alcohol, six for fraudulent identification numbers and four for drugs. The committee heard that Umalusi is deeply concern about a tender awarded to renovate its offices, which was awarded to three separate entities in March 2017 for R36 million. The project was started in May 2017 and payments to the value of R10.9 million have been made. Umalusi subsequently became aware of allegations of fraud regarding the tender. The committee was informed that Umalusi has followed due process with advice from legal counsel in terms of legislation. The providers did not respond to requests for further information on the matter. Since then, Umalusi has begun the process of instituting a civil claim against the joint venture. Committee Chairperson, Ms Bongiwe Mbinqo-Gigaba, said the committee will continue to monitor both entities and will conduct an oversight visit in the near future. Rajaa Azzakani
	27 August 2019 Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns.Read more