Parliament, Thursday, 29 August 2019 – The Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs is concerned by the level of lawlessness in municipalities in the North West that arose after the collapse of service delivery in the province. The committee visited various local municipalities in the province as part of the obligation placed on the National Council of Provinces following a decision by the provincial executive to place municipalities under Section 139 (1) (b) of the Constitution. The committee’s view is that while there are clear signs of total collapse of service delivery in various municipalities, the acts of lawlessness perpetrated by some among the communities undermine genuine service delivery concerns. “In Naledi, Tswaing and Ratlou local municipalities, the committee was informed that armed members of the community threatened councillors, stormed the office of the appointed administrator, dumped refuse within the municipal building, burnt and vandalised infrastructure, attacked employees and committed many other unpleasant actions. We urge our communities to find alternative ways of addressing their concerns, such as approaching provincial and national government and legislatures to intervene,” said Mr China Dodovu, the Chairperson of the committee. The collapse of governance in municipalities in the North West is concerning and must be addressed with urgency. The committee is of the view that the professionalisation of the local government sphere is a necessary pillar to deal with skills shortage within the sphere. But the most important pillar in returning municipalities to functionality is consequence management, ethical leadership and adherence to governance prescripts. “We urge the MEC and councils to urgently implement consequence management processes for those that have been found to be in the wrong,” Mr Dodovu said. The committee has called on the staff of the affected municipalities to work towards regaining the work ethic and commitment necessary to ensure service delivery happens. To this effect, the committee is appreciative of the efforts by the administrators within the affected municipalities to re-establish labour forums with unions aimed at strengthening relations between employer and employees that will act as a basis for collaborative effort to ensure efficient service delivery. The preoccupation of the committee and by extension the National Council of Provinces is to ensure that basic service delivery and people’s dignity is restored. Following the observations that have been made, the committee will meet next week to decide on the necessity of the intervention, as required by Section 139 (2)(c) of the constitution. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, MR CHINA DODOVU. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more