Parliament, Tuesday, 28 August 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Transport has called for transformation in the aviation industry. The committee is on a week-long oversight programme in Johannesburg. The programme also creates an opportunity for members of the committee to familiarise themselves with the entities of the Department of Transport. Today, the committee met entities in the aviation industry and conducted a walkabout of the OR Tambo Airport, in trying to understand the scope of operations. “The industry is highly technical, but needs to reflect the demographics of the country in all facets, and needs to ensure representation of women. The entities are doing well and are internationally recognised, but acknowledging lack of transformation is not enough”, said the Chairperson of the committee Mr Mosebenzi Zwane. He said transformation should be all encompassing and covering all aspects of aviation from human capital, procurement of goods, and management. “This is a sector that can make or break our economy, this sector generates billions of rands”, added Mr Zwane. Air Traffic Navigation Services’ (ATNS) Interim Chief Executive Office, Mr Thomas Bukulu, acknowledged that transformation was a concerning aspect in the area of their work. “Entities need to work hard on transformation targets, it is what is best for the country and the previously disadvantaged persons. This has got to be a constant matter entities report achievable targets on,” Mr Zwane said. The committee voiced satisfaction with governance of the entities, particularly the ATNS systems. The committee will tomorrow visit road transportation and traffic management entities including the South African National Roads Agency Limited (Sanral), Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC), and the Road Traffic Infringement Agency (RTIA). ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, MR MOSEBENZI ZWANE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly.Read more