Parliament, Tuesday, 27 August 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Technology has noted with concern the student protests at the University of Fort Hare which have led to the temporary suspension of the academic programme. The committee understands that the protests flared up due to students’ unhappiness with the allocation of the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) funding and allowances to eligible students, and other similar students’ grievances. Compounding the situation has been the violence associated with the protests, including the blocking of a major road leading to the town of Alice. Various media reports have also reported that students had also slaughtered two cows that were grazing on the university premises. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Mohlopi Mapulane, expressed serious concerns about the disruption of the university’s core business, which is teaching and learning, at this time of the academic year. The committee condemns any form of violence and destruction of infrastructure whenever students protest. Thus, the committee calls for an urgent intervention of the Department of Higher Education, Science and Technology to restore stability at the institution – and for teaching and learning to resume with no further disruptions. The committee calls upon the university’s Student Representative Council (SRC) to encourage the students to prioritise teaching and learning, and also allow the newly appointed Administrator to discharge his responsibilities of restoring governance, management and other challenges at the institution. Mr Mapulane said the committee will be closely monitoring the situation at the university and would be engaging with the Department of Higher Education, Science and Technology and NSFAS on the issues affecting the university, with a view of finding a long-lasting solution. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON, MR MOHLOPI MAPULANE. For media enquiries please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament.Read more