Parliament, Wednesday, 28 August 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Health was today briefed by the Department of Health on the health sector. In welcoming the presentation of the Department of Health, the Chairperson of the committee, Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo said: “The presentation fully prepares the committee to focus when conducting its oversight work on the department as the presentation assists the committee to fully understand every issue about the department.” The presentation of the department included the entities that report to the department. The entities have been scheduled to appear before the committee to make their presentations. What is important to highlight in the briefing document as presented by the department is the under reporting of some of the success stories that have been achieved by the department. The committee heard that the programme of mother to child transmission across many provinces is a huge success and improvement of the antenatal visits in 20 weeks of pregnancy is between 60% and 70%. The committee told the department that the programme must be accelerated. The committee was of the view that it will be important for the department to look into those specific areas that made it to achieve this success. MomConnect is one of the flagship health projects, which has proven to be useful in educating and encouraging women to take care of themselves and utilise available antenatal services during pregnancy. Dr Dhlomo said, this a programme that needs to be unpacked so as to see the link in maternal mortality since its inception. The committee called upon the department to focus on the primary healthcare tools that have been instituted, like the school healthcare programme, ideal clinic realization. “It is at primary healthcare that is going to make this country realise National Health Insurance (NHI)”, said Dr Dhlomo. The committee told the department that the appointment of clinic committees is an area that needs to be looked into, as according to the committee, if members of the clinic committee were appointed correctly, problems experienced in health facilities would be alleviated. The committee has welcomed the re-orientation of doctors that have been trained in Cuba. The doctors that have been trained in Cuba have beneficial experiences which orientate  them towards primary health care and prevention. Their subsequent training in South Africa is intended to fill skill gaps related to TB, HIV and major trauma. Some of the members of the committee questioned the feasibility of the programme, but Dr Dhlomo said, when the programme started there was a problem with the medical universities as there was no capacity to accommodate new applicants. However, the department said, it needs to be relooked and assessed if it’s still the case. Tomorrow (Thursday 29 August 2019) the committee will continue its engagement with the department where the Minister of Health, Dr Zweli Mkhize will brief the committee on the NHI  Bill. The meeting will be held at Good Hope Chambers at 10:30am ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, DR SIBONGISENI DHLOMO. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more