Parliament, Wednesday, 7 August 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Employment and Labour has welcomed the health initiative championed by the Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu), the National Council of Trade Unions (Nactu), and the Federation of Unions of SA (Fedusa).
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Lindelwa Dunjwa said the initiative will go a long way in ensuring a healthy, engaged and knowledgeable workforce.
	
	“The actions of Cosatu, Nactu and Fedusa are progressive and ought to be commended. Venturing into health issues in the workplace is innovative and in line with the vision of the President to encourage healthy living. This will ensure a healthy workforce,” Ms Dunjwa said.
	
	The three labour federations yesterday launched a national HIV response campaign, “Qina Msebenzi Uphile”, which aims to increase testing and screening for HIV, TB and non-communicable diseases in the mining, retail and agricultural sectors. Workers who test positive will be placed on treatment regimens.
	
	In this way the stigma against disease in the workplace will be addressed, Ms Dunjwa said, as she urged workers to support this campaign. “It is crucial that workers know that being sick is not a sin. Workers must get involved with these kinds of campaigns, for workers and by workers.”
	
	She called on those driving the campaign to be circumspect and treat sensitive information confidentially. The committee commends all the federations involved and called on those lagging behind to join it. The committee will monitor its progress with interest.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON, MS LINDELWA DUNJWA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email:smaputi@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more