The Portfolio Committee on Transport heard on Tuesday that the aviation industry is struggling with transformation. The committee is on a week-long oversight visit intended to familiarise members with the entities in the portfolio. A special focus today (Wednesday) is aviation with briefings from Air Traffic Navigation Systems (ATNS), Airports Company South Africa (ACSA) and the South African Civil Aviation Authority (SACAA). The Chairperson of the Committee, Mr Mosebenzi Zwane, welcomed ATNS progress on all aspects of governance, but said it needed to improve on transformation. ATNS Interim Chief Executive Officer, Mr Thomas Bukulu, said transformation was an area of concern. “The aviation industry is not transformed. We have a plan aimed towards addressing transformation in both demography and procurement spend,” Mr Bukulu said. ATNS’s budget mainly went to multinationals, he said, but the entity is devising a plan to absorb small medium and micro enterprises (SMMEs) into the business. “Capital expenditure and procurement tend to be technical. Some of the service providers in the country are unable to bid for the tenders. We recently advertised and only two bids were in the box. We need to shake up the market and get small companies to bid in the projects,” he said. ATNS prioritised safety, as it was the basis of commercial viability. “The company has a zero tolerance for accidents, but sometimes incidents do occur,” Mr Bukulu said. “The important thing is the severity of these. We do not want the high-risk incidents, but these incidents give us an opportunity to learn and improve our operation.” To grow revenue, ATNS is investigating expansion into Africa. ATNS reported a R250 million profit before tax for the current financial year. “Fellow service providers on the continent are generally struggling with infrastructure, and that gives us an opportunity to grow and generate revenue,” Mr Bukulu said. Committee Members asked questions on various aspects of the business, including the risks posed by drones in the airspace, international competitiveness, revenue tariffs. They heard that ATNS was experiencing challenges with debt collection, as some airlines owed ATNS well over R60 million, which is against regulations. Committee Member Mr Thamsanqa Mabhena asked if a panel to recruit the new CEO has been assembled. “This position is critical for decision-making. Another matter that needs attention is the 62% of budget spent on salaries. This is unsustainable,” he said. The committee will also receive briefings from ACSA and the SACAA. Sibongile Maputi
	28 August 2019 Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more