Parliament, Wednesday, 28 August 2019 – The Joint Standing Committee on Defence and the Select Committee on Security and Justice today conducted an oversight visit to the Cape Flats, to ascertain the efficacy of the deployment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) in support of the South African Police Service (SAPS). In keeping with the vision of an activist parliament, Parliament was represented by three portfolio committees and one select committee. The Joint Standing Committee on Defence also joined the oversight visit. The committees are satisfied with the SANDF Operation Prosper and SAPS’s Operation Lockdown and its provision of stability to many of the communities across the Cape Flats where SANDF is deployed. The committees were informed that there are daily deployments in the 10 priority areas and deployments are now focussed on the cluster-level priority police stations. The joint operations of the SAPS and SANDF have seen vehicle check points, cordon and search operations. The SANDF has assisted through roadblocks, joint foot patrols, joint air patrols, air trooping and overt intelligence gathering. The SANDF has deployed a battalion plus strength on the Cape Flats under the command of their Provincial Joint Tactical Headquarters. While the committees welcomed the support provided and in keeping with military doctrine of dominating the areas deployed, there are challenges in fully implementing the doctrine. These challenges ranged from effective intelligence gathering to poor communication with affected communities to speedily respond to developing situations. The committees are satisfied that the interim deployment strategy has assisted communities in bringing stability to the areas. While the lack of operational security is noted, we believe that the co-operation between the SAPS and the SANDF will continue to yield results for our communities. The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Ms Joemat-Pettersson, has announced that the visit to the Cape Flats is the first step in a new phased approach by Parliament to engage with communities affected by the scourge of crime. The Chairpersons of all the Community Police Forums (CPFs) affected by gang violence will be invited to parliament for a further engagement. The CPF Chairpersons from 10 areas have supported the deployment and have interacted with the committees and presented their concerns about the deployment and the high levels of crime. The committees started their visit in Lentegeur in Mitchell’s Plain and proceeded to Nyanga and Delft police stations. One of their main requests is that the deployment of the SANDF should be extended, while another request relates to the proper handing over when the SANDF eventually withdraws. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSONS OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEES ON POLICE AND DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS, MS TINA JOEMAT-PETTERSSON AND CYRIL XABA. For media enquiries please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mava Lukani (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 503 1840
	Email: mlukani@parliament.gov.za Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them.Read more