Parliament, Monday, 5 August 2019 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson, called for the senior management of the South African Police Service (SAPS) to urgently revise its strategies intended to deal with the many cases of gender-based violence. In commemorating Women’s Month, the committee is aware that the rights of women and children continue to be undermined as a result of acts of violence perpetrated against them. The committee has noted with concern the shortage of rape kits at various police stations countrywide, and has called on the SAPS management to urgently deal with this matter and ensure the availability of these rape kits at all police stations. The committee has also called on SAPS management to ensure that police stations are at all times ready to deal with acts of violence against women and children. This includes the expansion of the family violence, child protection and sexual offences units to enhance the specialist investigative capacity to deal with gender-based violence, including cases of rape, ensuring that police stations have the requisite rape kits across the country, as well as the expansion of victim-friendly facilities at police stations countrywide to accommodate and assist victims. Furthermore, the committee has called for SAPS management to ensure that there are adequately trained female SAPS members to deal with gender-based violence victims and be able to take samples with the rape kits. But above all, training modules for trainee police officers must include a component of gender-based violence. “The Minister made a few undertakings during his Budget-Vote speech around gender-based violence, it is now up to the National Commissioner and his leadership cohort to implement those promises. Of high priority must be strengthening strategies to deal with the scourge of gender-based violence and establishing an environment conducive for women and children to report these cases at police stations,” Ms Joemat-Pettersson said. But, the committee is cognisant of the fact that there is a need for a collaborative and multi-dimensional approach if we were to successfully end the scourge of gender-based violence. This includes measures to reduce alcohol and substance abuse across the country, measures to grow the economy and decrease unemployment and poverty, as well as a societal commitment to monitor abuses against women in their communities. The committee, in performing its oversight duty, will intensify its monitoring of the implementation of the Domestic Violence Act and the Sexual Offences Act by checking the support and assistance victims receive at all police stations. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MS TINA JOEMAT-PETTERSSON. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more