Parliament, Thursday, 01 August 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services are calling for public comment on the amendment of the Promotion of Access to Information Act, so as to provide for information on the private funding of political parties and independent candidates to be recorded, preserved and made available.
	
	Committee Chairperson Mr Bulelani Magwanishe said interested persons are invited to submit written comment on the Bill by 16h30 on 31 August 2019. Comments received after the closing date will not be considered.
	
	The Bill gives an obligation to the accounting officer of a political party (which is defined to include an independent candidate), to create and keep records of any money over R100 000 paid or donated by persons or entities to a political party, any money lent to the political party, any money paid on behalf of a political party, assets, services or facilities provided to a political party and any sponsorships provided to a political party. The records must be made available on social media platforms on a quarterly basis. Furthermore, the clause requires that the records be updated and made available on social media platforms of the political party concerned two months before the election of the National Assembly or Provincial Legislature and before municipal elections.
	
	Should you require the Memorandum on the Objects of the Bill in any of the official languages, please contact the Committee Secretary, Mr Siyabamkela Mthonjeni. Enquiries and written submissions should be directed to Mr Mthonjeni by email on smthonjeni@parliament.gov.za or by post/hand to be delivered: W/S 3/108, 3rd Floor, 90 Plein Street, Cape Town, 8000. He can be contacted on 021 403 3734 or 083 709 8390.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, MR BULELANI MAGWANISHE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed.Read more