Parliament, Wednesday, 28 August 2019 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure, Ms Nolitha Ntobongwana, has asked the South African Air Force, the Independent Development Trust (IDT) and the appointed service provider to ensure that sinkholes do not impact the functionality, effectiveness and safety of the Waterkloof Air Force Base (WAFB) as a national key point. The WAFB has a high-risk classification due to dolomitic soil conditions. To date several buildings on the 640ha base have been demolished as a result of ground movement brought on by water ingress from wet services. The committee is in Gauteng on official oversight visits to various government entities reporting to the Ministry and Department of Public Works and Infrastructure (DPWI). During a visit to IDT, the committee was informed that the DPWI had appointed the IDT as the Implementing Agent for the Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Sinkhole and Dolomite at the WAFB. Committee members were informed that the base was safe for use and that it was constantly being monitored for the development of sinkholes. Visiting the WAFB, Ms Ntobongwana cautioned that: “We can’t have a national key point used by the President and Ministers declared as a high risk area because of the development of sinkholes.” She called on all stakeholders to “work together to ensure that the base is fully safe for usage by members of the Executive.” Committee members welcomed the appointment, in July 2019, of the contractor to ensure that the base is made safe. The contractor will report amongst others on progress made in relation to: Clearance of various sinkholes commenced on 23 August 2019. The contract is expected to last for 36 months. Ms Ntobongwana stated the committee’s intention to do a follow up visit to check on the completion of the process to secure WAFB as a national key point within this five-year term. The committee will be provided with regular progress reports. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE, MS NOLITHA NTOBONGWANA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Faith Ndenze, 0813770686 A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more