Parliament, Friday, 30 August 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises which is currently on oversight to familiarise themselves with the operations and challenges faced by state-owned enterprises, met with South African Express Airways (SAX) to probe the current crises relating to the nation-wide grounding of flights. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Khaya Mgaxa, said: “The committee hopes for a speedy and sustainable agreement between SAX and Airports Company South Africa (Acasa).” Interim Chief Executive Officer (CEO) Ms Siza Mzimela told the committee that the grounding of flights can be attributed to the various historic challenges facing the airline. The committee heard that these include a weak balance sheet, frozen credit lines, liquidity challenges, long outstanding debt and a significant monthly cash bill. This resulted in low staff morale, a high number of management vacancies and a lack of accountability. A number of contracts were also found in the system done via third parties, which resulted in additional costs to the airline. The committee heard that the R1.2 billion re-capitalisation received in February 2019 was ring-fenced to settle government-guaranteed debt only and was not nearly enough to cover the operations of the Governance, Profitability, Operational Efficiency, Customer Value Proposition and Human Capital (G-POCH) strategy adopted by the new Board. The airline was thus left with no working capital, since RMB bank, subsequent to settling the debt using the recapitalisation funds, pulled the overdraft facility. Acasa’s action of grounding the flights is thus attributed to SAX’s inability to pay the legacy debt of around R71 million. In addition, whilst the airline is able to secure an overdraft facility of R300 million, this is subjected to government guarantees the committee heard. Briefing the committee on developments, Deputy Minister of Public Enterprises, Mr Phumulo Masualla, reiterated that the turn-around plan rests on an injection of resources. The resources that were received, however, went to pay previous debt and did not address the cost of current and future operations. The committee welcomed the assurance by Mr Phumulo that the situation is receiving urgent attention, as the Board is currently engaging with ACSA management, as well as the Department of Transport. Mr Mgaxa noted that SAX’s request for a government guarantee of R300 million should take cognisance of the fact that South Africa has serious financial challenges. Alternative solutions should be investigated in the event that the guarantee is not approved. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES, MR KHAYA MAGAXA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Felicia Lombard (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more