Parliament, Tuesday, 6 August 2019 – South Africa commemorates Women’s Month in August, as a tribute to the thousands of women who marched to the Union Buildings on 9 August 1956 in protest against the extension of the pass laws to women. This historic march was a turning point in the role of women in the struggle for freedom.
	
	The Chairperson for the Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities, Ms Nonhlanhla Ncube-Ndaba, said the dawn of democracy brought about the enactment of women’s rights in the country. A robust legislative framework has been developed over the years, but the key challenge remains the implementation of these laws and policies to ensure the promotion, protection and fulfillment of women’s rights. Women in South Africa continue to face the triple challenge of poverty, inequality and unemployment. Moreover, the country has high levels of increased gender-based violence and femicide, in particular.
	
	Following South Africa’s transition to democracy and the development of an inclusive Constitution, a number of institutions were created to strengthen democracy and promote respect for human rights. The Commission for Gender Equality is one such key institution. It was established to deal with and address the specific issues of inequality and discrimination against women. The Commission for Gender Equality is an important mechanism to focus the attention of Parliament and the broader South Africa on the goal of gender equality. Thus strengthening the Commission for Gender Equality is a key aspect to sustainable action towards addressing gender equality. The committee welcomes the appointment of the new Commissioners to the Commission for Gender Equality and looks forward to the work ahead in the sixth Parliament.
	
	Ms Ncube-Ndaba said women’s month is an opportunity to celebrate and reflect on women's achievements, as well as the problems they face in the struggle to be free and the important role they play in society.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WOMEN, YOUTH AND PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES, MS NONHLANHLA NCUBE-NDABA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa.Read more