The Portfolio Committee on Transport told the Rail Safety Regulator (RSR) that it needs to do the work it exists to do. “The committee is with you, go and do your work without fear or favour. You are a regulatory body, so just regulate. The committee is against anybody dying on the railway lines as a result of non-compliance,” committee Chairperson, Mosebenzi Zwane, said. He cautioned that the entity will fail if it wanted to deal with transgressions nicely, and urged the RSR to put its foot down when regulating. The committee is in a week-long visit in Johannesburg conducting oversight on entities of the Department of Transport. The oversight programme also affords members of the committee an opportunity to familiarise themselves with the entities. The committee received a briefing from the RSR on its annual performance plan, and an update on challenges faced by the Passanger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa). The RSR’s Acting Chief Executive Officer, Ms Tsepo Kgare, told the committee that there was a decrease in fatalities, and that for the current year, that rate of fatalities is standing at 3 990 and safety-related challenges at around 8 000. “People are mostly struck by trains along the rail networks. The number of people found along the rails is highest and is a problem of human settlements that are being built along the rail networks,” Ms Kgare said. Members sought clarity on various issues including the expired permit for Prasa, abandoned rail networks, supervisory role on the Prasa’s Modernisation Programme and the court order regarding Prasa’s operations. The committee heard how failure to maintain networks resulted in defective systems. The committee heard from the briefing meeting that human factor challenges and inadequate interface management between Transnet and Prasa systems contribute to the accidents. Ms Kgare told the committee that the RSR had issued Prasa with a six-month permit with strict conditions. “They do not comply with their own rules, as well as the regulator’s prescripts,” said Mr Kgare. Mr Kgare indicated that the RSR supported the work of Prasa but leadership instability at the entity impacted on Prasa’s governance. “The occurrence of accidents is a symptom of a much bigger problem. Without a proper functioning safety management system, you will continue to see these,” added Ms Kgare. The committee heard that penalties had been imposed on Prasa including a R5 million penalty, as well as invocation of the permit. Prasa will brief the committee later today, after which the committee will conduct a walkabout at the Dunnottar plant in Nigel, where the manufacturing of new trains is happening. By Sibongile Maputi
	27 August 2019 Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them.Read more