The Portfolio Committee on Transport is satisfied with progress at the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa) train-manufacturing plant, Dunnotar, in Nigel, east of Johannesburg. The committee is on a week-long oversight programme in Gauteng. The programme also creates an opportunity for members of the committee to familiarise themselves with the Department of Transport’s entities. As part of the programme, the committee embarked on a walkabout of the Dunnotar plant, which employs more than 875 people. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Mosebenzi Zwane, said that what the committee observed at Dunnotar is not reported on in the media. “This is an inspiring story, South African-built trains by South Africans. This is the kind of investment that we require in order to grow the economy,” Mr Zwane said. The committee heard that Dunnotar-manufactured trains are already running on rail networks in the Western and Eastern Cape and in Gauteng. The committee heard that the intention is to increase production to four new trains each month. The committee also received a frank briefing on challenges confronting Prasa, including governance, low staff morale, leadership instability, the regulatory framework, declining stock, poor customer satisfaction, compliance with permit conditions, staff discipline and declining revenues. The Chairperson of the Prasa Board, Ms Khanyisile Kweyama, told the committee that Prasa was broken. She said: “Prasa could function if everybody made a decision to rally around a common purpose of getting Prasa on track. The commitment is required from all stakeholders including the commuters. “The board and management should be working together. Unfortunately, there is a history at Prasa of the two structures not marching to the same beat.” Ms Kweyama revealed that in trying to stabilise Prasa, three executive positions (chief procurement, chief financial officer and chief of human resoures) candidates had been recommended to the Minister. The committee heard that Prasa operates on a safety permit issued for a year, with conditions regulated by the court order. “The impact of the order was such that the board meets every month to try and meet the compliance issues the Rail Safety Regulator (RSR) raised,” said Ms Kweyama. This would not be necessary if Prasa was doing its work correctly. The committee also heard that the entity was unable to pay the wages of about 700 dismissed employees who were reinstated by the Constitutional Court in 2017. The 700 are now looking to file an application of contempt of court. “We need to raise about a billion rand for this purpose, but it is simply not there.” A request for this money had been made to the National Treasury. Mr Zwane said the committee will approach the Minister, Mr Fikile Mbalula, on appointing a permanent Chief Executive Officer. “Deal with Prasa. Leadership stability is crucial. We knew a lot about Prasa without hearing from Prasa. The perception is bad out there,” Mr Zwane said. Perceptions damaged Prasa’s credibility, Mr Zwane said. Consequences management should be implemented at Prasa for those who refused to do what they are employed to do. “Those are people who should be at home. Prasa should get to a situation where the board can say this number of people have been relieved of their duties,” he said. Sibongile Maputi
	28 August 2019 Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them.Read more