The selling of fake licences is costing government billions of rands, the Portfolio Committee on Transport heard on Thursday as the Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC) briefed the committee on its annual performance plan. The Chairperson of the Board, Advocate Zola Majavu, said people have been arrested for selling licences. “Selling driver’s licences is a common business. If one deals with these offences, you will be saving government billions of rands,” Advocate Majavu said. He also raised other challenges, such as disregard for traffic regulations, irregular shareholder committee meetings and legal challenges to Tasima. After the briefing, committee members asked questions about various issues, including the issuing of public driving permits to foreign nationals, the registration of cars from other countries and the eNatis system. Committee member Mr Chris Hunsinger said there was a need for driving school practitioners to be registered and an alignment of all provinces on the road safety programme. Committee member Mr Bafuze Yabo said: “Cloned licence discs and number plates are easy to find. There are petty criminals who print the actual IDs. This is a thriving business and its taking revenue from government.” He also raised the issue of corruption and bribes at testing centres and said cars ought to be equipped with cameras to address this problem. The committee also received a briefing from the Road Traffic Infringement Agency (RTIA). Its Chief Executive Officer, Mr Jeff Chuwe, said road crashes are a huge challenge. “13 000 annual road traffic fatalities cost the state about R200 billion annually. Most road traffic crashes are preceded by road traffic offences and infringements. This is a catastrophe,” Mr Chuwe said. He highlighted as particular challenges drunk driving, excessive speeding, reckless overtaking in dangerous spots, distracted driving mostly due to cell phones and texting while driving. Mr Chuwe said there was nothing unconstitutional about the Administrative Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences (Aarto) Act, which has recently been signed into law. “Aarto is not taking away anybody’s right to go to court, as claimed by opponents of the Act. The unconstitutionality issues were dealt with a long time ago, when the constitutionality of the Act was confirmed by the state law advisor and the parliamentary legal advisors. We are happy about the President signing the new Act. It will simplify the RTIA mandate and the sacrifices that have been made,” Mr Chuwe said. A workshop on Aarto was proposed for committee members, but the committee said it will deliberate on the matter. The weeklong visit to Johannesburg ends today with an oversight visit to the South African National Roads Agency (Sanral). Sibongile Maputi
	30 August 2019 The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”.Read more