Parliament, Tuesday, 27 August 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy has noted with concern the misalignment of legislative mandates with regard to some entities of the department, saying that such action poses a serious challenge in the minerals and energy sector. The committee is in Gauteng on an oversight trip to visit entities under the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy. The purpose of the visit is to gain an understanding of the entities’ legislative mandates, challenges and proposed interventions. Committee Chairperson, Mr Sahlulele Luzipo, said: “Our visit is not to police. We are here to gain knowledge that will assist the committee to develop a programme that will focus on resolving legislative challenges faced by the entities, in order to create the environment that will be conducive for them to deliver on their mandates.” The committee began its oversight visit on Monday at the department, in which it was briefed by the Petroleum Association of South Africa, as well as a visit to the Council for Geoscience. On Tuesday, it visited the Energy Regulator of South Africa, as well as the National Nuclear Regulator. Eight more entities will be visited between Wednesday and Friday, including the South African Nuclear Energy Corporation, National Radioactive Waste Disposal Institute, Council for Mineral Technology of South Africa, South African Diamond and Precious Metal Regulator, State Diamond Trader, Central Energy Fund, Mine Health and Safety Council, and the South African National Energy Development Institute. Mr Luzipo said that following the oversight visit, the committee will then invite the department in order to establish how fast it could address all the challenges that were discovered by the committee. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY, MR SAHLULELE LUZIPO. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa.Read more