Parliament, Wednesday, 28 August 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs has urged the Department of Home Affairs to find ways of enhancing its workforce in key international markets, especially China, India and Nigeria which have been identified as key growth areas for tourism for South Africa. The committee is on a four-day oversight visit programme at the Department of Home Affairs’s Head Office and its entities. The committee heard from the briefing it received from the department that the department has only four officials in China, four in India and only three in Nigeria. According to the committee, this low human resource base impacts negatively on the ability of the department to process visa applications for applicants in those countries with estimated high number of people wishing to visit South Africa. The concern about the low human resource base arise from fact that tourism has been identified as a key pillar in President Cyril Ramaphosa’s stimulus package intended to jumpstart the country’s economy. The committee is aware of the financial constrains the department is facing, hence its call for urgent interaction with the Department of International Relations and the Department of Cooperation and National Treasury to find ways of working around this challenge. Meanwhile, the committee welcomes the information that the department has procured 41 new mobile units that will add to the 114 existing ones. The committee maintains that the department must at all times, find ways of ensuring that the services of the mobile units reach the most remote areas in the country. Furthermore, the committee has called for urgency in ensuring that the new fleet of 41 units is fitted with technology and rolled out across the country. The committee agrees with the department that there is a need to have an integration of the ID system with other home affairs and government systems to streamline government services as a whole to ensure streamlined services and to strengthen the fight against corruption as well as to reduce duplication within the system. The committee notes the department’s intention to review tariffs for its documentation. However, while the committee acknowledges the need to review tariffs from time to time, based on operating costs, it has cautioned the department against overcharging, especially the indigent for documentation they need. The committee told the department that the tariffs considerations must be fair to both the department and the users. On immigration, the committee calls for the conclusion of the policy proposal and legislation management on the International Migration to provide certainty on this critical area. The committee is eager to engage on the amendments of relevant legislation and will do its best to conclude this process in a reasonable time, once the amendments are tabled. The committee has welcomed the department’s focus on enforcement and reprioritisation of R70 million to procure vehicles and equipment to strengthen the inspectorate function which it has raised for a number of times. The committee is of the view that 700 odd officials in the inspectorate is paltry in comparison to the mandate of the inspectorate. The committee remains concerned by the challenges of connectivity at the Department of Home Affairs which impact negatively on its services. “More concerning is the lack of precise plans on how the long standing challenge with SITA is going to be resolved, taking into cognisance the regulatory restrictions as a result of the SITA Act”, said the acting Chairperson of the committee, Mr Mosa Chabane. The vetting of staff in critical areas within the home affairs s environment is a positive step in the fight against fraud and corruption within the system. The committee has urged the department to fast-track approval processes with State Security Agency. The committee is concerned by the overburdening of the application processes governed by the Immigration Act. “It is concerning in the context that applicants whose applications have been denied abuse the system with numerous appeals. The committee will consider ways of legislatively strengthening the process and eliminating countless number of appeals which has an impact on the speed with which the department processes genuine applications,” Mr Chabane said. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE ACTING PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, MR MOSA CHABANE For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed.Read more