Parliament, Friday, 30 August 2019 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson, has denounced the actions of taxi drivers in the Pretoria Central Business District (CBD) with reports suggesting that they are taking the law into their hands in the fight against drugs. These actions have resulted in chaotic scenes in the CBD that ended up with breaking of the shops and looting of goods, among other things. While the committee is in support of the fight against crime in general and the fight against drugs in particular, it has cautioned against civilians taking the law into their hands. “Only the police are well equipped to fight against crime and are authorised by the Constitution and relevant legislation to be in the forefront in the fight against crime”, Ms Joemat-Pettersson said. The police are trained and their raids are planned to ensure prosecution. The taxi drivers must assist the police with information that can be used to track, confiscate and make arrests that will ensure that acts of criminality are rooted out. The committee is against the use of mob justice. The committee calls on the police to set up stakeholder forums with taxi drivers and the community in general to map out ways in which cooperation can be guaranteed and perpetrators of crime can be brought to book. The committee also calls upon the police to maximise cooperation, and share information with the residents of Pretoria and all South Africans in general in the fight against drugs. The police must also ensure that normality is returned in the Pretoria CBD, as also Pretoria is the seat of government. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MS TINA JOEMAT-PETTERSSON For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more