Parliament, Wednesday, 7 August 2019 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperation, Ms Tandi Mahambehlala, has called on South Africans to exercise caution when reacting to reports about foreign nationals allegedly fighting with police in Johannesburg. “The temptation to resort to an ‘us-against-them’ approach when dealing with foreign nationals should be rejected. We should not respond in a way that may undermine South Africa’s standing on the global stage or the efforts of government on the continent,” Ms Mahambehlala said. “We have a responsibility to lead regional integration and promote intra- and inter-trade among African countries. However, thuggery and criminal elements that seek to destabilise our country in the fight against crime should be dealt with decisively.” On Wednesday, the police raided foreign-owned shops in Johannesburg. This comes after an incident where foreign nationals are alleged to have fought back against the police. “That conduct against the police cannot be condoned. It does not matter who is the perpetrator. The committee supports a measured, coordinated and well-reasoned response. Such a response must take into consideration South Africa’s national interest and the long-term vision of reviving Africa.” The committee trust that the Department of International Relations and Cooperation will give guidance, if so required, and facilitate interventions. The committee supports the work of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the Border Management Authority Bill, and believes it should be expedited in order to address challenges with immigration. Africa Day is meaningless if a mere two months later South Africans turn against their African brothers. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON, MS TANDI MAHAMBEHLALA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more