The Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, Mr Joe Maswanganyi, has warned the banking sector to guard against massive job losses as a result of the inevitable effects of the fourth industrial revolution (4IR), which could see robotics and digitalisation replacing humans in the workplace. Mr Maswanganyi was speaking after the Standing and Select Committees on Finance completed an induction process, where they were briefed on the responsibilities of the entities reporting to the National Treasury. “The decision for us to get inducted was taken at the beginning of the term of the sixth parliament, so that when we do oversight we are informed of the task … The exercise we have been going through has really enhanced our knowledge and understanding of the National Treasury and its entities,” said Mr Maswanganyi. “While we welcome the 4IR and the developments and opportunities that it brings to our society, we cannot accept a situation where robots will replace people at the work place. That will be against our efforts of creating jobs and fighting poverty,” he said. Mr Maswanganyi was reacting to reports about looming retrenchments in the banking sector. Banks have closed a number of their branches throughout the country as a result of digitalisation, which encourages self-service, with clients using their cell phones and computers, rather than walking into a branch. Mr Maswanganyi also raised a concern about transformation in the financial sector, saying this important issue needed to be debated. “The issue of transformation is very crucial. The ownership of the banking sector is not a matter that can be swept under the carpet. We will continue to debate the matter. We want to see it represent the demographics of the country. Transformation is not only about having four black members of the board without tempering with ownership.” Also speaking after the workshop, the Deputy Minister of Finance Dr David Masondo said he believed the objectives of the induction have been achieved. “We also identified gaps where we need to improve to continue building the country, to make sure the economy grows, create jobs and collect income taxes,” said the Deputy Minister. After meeting the South African Revenue Service, the Public Investment Corporation, the Government Employees Pension Fund and the Government Pensions Administration Agency, among others, the committees concluded the induction programme with a visit to the South African Reserve Bank. As expected, one of the matters that dominated the discussions was the governance and mandate of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB), which has been a subject of public debate following resolutions by the African National Congress (ANC) and the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) to end private shareholding in the bank. “SARB must be publicly owned and have no private shareholders. There must be a debate on the discontinuation of private shareholding in the SARB,” said committee member Mr Floyd Shivambu (EFF), adding that nationalisation was not a threat to the independence of the bank as that was guaranteed by the law. Mr Yunus Carrim, the Chairperson of the Select Committee, supported calls for a debate on the ownership of the bank. “Yes the markets might get jittery, but there is nothing in discussing the matter, it is already in the public domain.” The Deputy Minister of Finance said it was true that the ANC and the EFF have a resolution on buying out private shareholders, “… but the question is how do we make sure it doesn’t disrupt the economy”. Reserve Bank Governor Mr Lesetja Kganyago told the committees that private shareholding at the central bank is an historical legacy. These shareholders do not own the SARB and their rights are limited. “They play no role whatsoever in setting or influencing the key mandates of the SARB, like monetary policy or financial stability policy,” said Mr Kganyago. Sakhile Mokoena30 August 2019 Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns.Read more