Parliament, Saturday, 31 August 2019 – The Portfolio Committee yesterday concluded its week-long oversight visit to the Department of Public Enterprises and a number of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), including South African Airways, South African Express, Denel and Transnet in Gauteng. One of the major challenges identified by the committee is the need, not only for strategies to recover funds lost to corruption and malfeasance, but the need for officials implicated in these to be held responsible. Financial constraints relating to low levels of revenue, high operational costs and challenges with liquidity are some of the reasons behind the constant need for government guarantees and the reasons behind crises such as those faced by the South African Express Airlines (SAX) this week. The grounding of SAX flights by the Airports Company of South Africa (ACSA) on Wednesday, 28 August 2019 provided the committee with an opportunity to receive an immediate, first-hand explanation on circumstances that led to this decision by ACSA. Long-standing debt, weak balance sheets and the impact of state capture were just some of the issues that lead to not only to SAX’s inability to pay ACSA the approximate amount of R70 million owed, but the reason behind the challenges faced by all SOEs. Chairperson of the committee, Mr Khaya Magaxa said that: “As the newly constituted Portfolio Committee on Enterprises for the 6th Parliament, we have now had direct exposure to the challenges faced by SOEs. We have met with the Executive Management and some of the Board Members of these SOEs, and they were informed of the committee’s intention to assist in dealing with these challenges that have brought many of our SOEs to its knees. The committee will also perform robust oversight to ensure that these entities are brought to a point where it is able to function optimally”. The oversight was aimed at familiarising the committee with the operations and the vast number of challenges facing SOEs. The committee will, during the next ten days deliberate and draft their report on the identified challenges. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES, MR KHAYA MAGAXA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Felicia Lombard (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”.Read more