Parliament, Friday, 30 August 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Transport has said the pending ministerial announcement on the future of etolls, needed to take to heart the interest of South Africans as well as the South African National Roads Agency Limited (SANRAL).
	The Chairperson, Mr Mosebenzi Zwane, said the committee hoped the ministerial intervention on etolls, whose decision is imminent, will resolve the current impasse and not fuel further the tensions between road-users and SANRAL. “It clearly is not right that an entity, tasked with such a crucial mandate as maintenance and construction of the roads, is unable to raise money from the market. It surely is not right that SANRAL projects are stalled indefinitely, the entity is the heartbeat of the economy,” Mr Zwane said. “As a society we need to come to agreement on the importance of the work that SANRAL does, and accept that it is the kind of work that could not solely be funded from the national fiscus.” He said if SANRAL were to rely on government funding, the entity will run into the ground and the impact of that will be too severe to contemplate. On Friday, SANRAL briefed the committee on its annual performance plan where it identified rejection of etolls in Gauteng, tolling of national roads, and the failure on the Gauteng Freeway Improvement Project, as having resulted in difficulties in accessing the bond markets. Mr Zwane said SANRAL cannot afford to fail, and that any possible challenge as a result of etolls could be averted, especially if leaders take responsibility and not play politics around etolls. “Continuous road maintenance and improvements is non-negotiable and such work requires that there be no liquidity challenges at SANRAL.” The committee is concluding its weeklong visit to all entities administered by the Department of Transport. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON, MR MOSEBENZI ZWANE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly.Read more