The National Treasury appeared before the Standing Committee on Appropriations to give details about the Special Appropriations Bill that is currently before Parliament. This Bill was brought to effect when it was realised that Eskom will be able to service its debt through the normal appropriation process announced by the Finance Minister in February this year (2019), who allocated R23 billion to Eskom. This Bill has been put before Parliament urgently because Eskom needs a R26 billion injection. This is, according to the Director General of the National Treasury, Mr Dondo Mogajane, a result of “low tariffs determinations by the National Energy Regulator of South Africa, a decline in sales volumes, continuing cost escalations of the new build programme due to its persistent delays.” In his view, this special Bill was triggered by Eskom’s annual financial results, which illustrated its acute financial challenges that could bring it to its knees. As a result, there was a realisation that something must be done, because a well-functioning and financially stable Eskom was vital to the sustenance of the South African economy and to the current endeavours aimed at reviving the country’s economic growth trajectory anchored on its sustainability. “Without any financial assistance from government, the company would be unable to meet obligations through the 2019/2020 financial year. And that would have adverse effect on our economy and our attempts to resuscitate it,” said Mr Mogajane. One of National Treasury’s main considerations is that Eskom’s “projected revenues will not be adequate enough to cover its interest payment, debt repayments and capital expenditure requirements”. What worried the treasury more, Mr Mogajane said, was the fact that Eskom could not honour its obligations. He said: “The failure to meet its obligations could have had a negative consequence for Eskom and the fiscus, hence, the minister had to intervene and invoke the Special Appropriations Bill, which requested Parliament to appropriate R26 billion to Eskom to enable it to meet the financial obligations of its lenders and investors.” This Appropriation Bill which was tabled in February 2019 by the Minister of Finance was assented to by President Cyril Ramaphosa in August. The timing of this special Bill is crucial, according to Mr Mogajane, because “failure to execute the funding plan may result in Eskom experiencing liquidity shortfalls at 31 March 2020 and would require additional funding in addition to the R26 billion provide through the Special Appropriation Bill.” In keeping with government undertaking to streamline Eskom, Mr Freeman Nomvalo has been appointed as the Chief Restructuring Officer. He is charged with a task of making Eskom more manageable and profitable. There is also now a Special Paper on Eskom’s Road Map that will “outline a more detailed transformation journey that Eskom will undertake as well as clarity on measures to resolve its financial challenges”, opined Mr Nomvalo. The members of the committee criticised unanimously the fact that they had to consider a special appropriation bill that had no conditions. In their view, it would be better for Eskom to appear before them to explain the finer details of its turn-around strategy and to determine whether the set of conditions of its bail-out set by the National Treasury are feasible or not. What they would not agree to, said members of the committee, is to be pressurised to pass a Special Appropriation Bill without set conditions. The Chairperson of the Committee, Mr Sfiso Buthelezi, said it was crucial for Eskom to appear before the committee to account for “what has happened in the last financial year, when a new board and governance structure were installed, and why losses are still recurring. We need to find out if is there a strategy to curb these losses and bring about financial stability. We need this information first while we wait for the grand plan.” He cautioned against over reliance on the Chief Restructuring Officer. “I don’t want to sound pessimist, but the high hopes that are pinned on this office are, to an extent, burdensome to its incumbent”, he said. He further explained his view on that: “Eskom is a complex company that no single person can turn around alone. The officer will even need more time than anticipated to understand how it works. He will not come up with one-solution-fits-all approach. That will not work in such a multi-layered company.” Abel Mputing28 August 2019 MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more