Parliament, Tuesday, 20 August 2019 – The collapse of governance systems at historical disadvantage institutions and TVET colleges needs a closer look from the department, the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Technology said. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Phillemon Mapulane, said it was even concerning that the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) has been under administration for some time. Whilst briefed on the White Paper on Post-School Education and Training on Tuesday, the committee heard that challenges in the sector are varied, and corrupt activities contribute to governance challenges in many institutions. The University of Fort Hare, and Vaal University of Technology, are both under administration. “If the sector is to meaningfully contribute to the skills revolution that the economy needs, it is important to have universities managed effectively and efficiently. The challenges that are there should constantly be worked on.” Mr Mapulane said it worried the committee that there is a study that indicated that of the total number of children who start school at Grade R, only 60% write Grade 12 exams, 37% of which achieve bachelor passes, 12% of whom access university, and only 4% are able to get a degree. “This is shocking. Isn’t it the problem that the economy is facing? The economy requires skills and citizens that can be very productive in the economy. Until we get it right, we will not be able to resolve the education system in the country,” Mr Mapulane said. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON, MR PHILLEMON MAPULANE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email:smaputi@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more