Parliament, Tuesday, 20 August 2019 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Transport, Mr Mosebenzi Zwane, has noted objections and concerns by various interest groups, subsequent to the signing of the Administrative and Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences (Aarto) Act. Mr Zwane said opposition to Aarto is misinformed, as detailed participatory processes were undertaken where concerns raised were given due consideration.
	
	“Both Houses of Parliament undertook comprehensive and exhaustive participatory processes after the Bill was tabled. Similar processes were undertaken by the government. Stakeholders had ample opportunity to influence the processes,” said Mr Zwane.
	The Aarto Act had recently been conceded to and signed by the President into law, thereby kick-starting, among other things, the demerit system for drivers. However, certain groups have threatened to take it for constitutional review.
	
	Mr Zwane cautioned that activist groups should not play opposition to government’s efforts of improving the lives of South Africans. “Opposition to Aarto is misinformed, especially that people are scrambling at issues they want reviewed. No stakeholder was closed outside of the public participation process, and all input was taken into consideration during the process of finalising the Bill,” he said.
	
	South Africans should instead seek to make this constitutionally sound Aarto Act effective, and work to enhance it so that it benefited the broader society.
	The committee remains of the view that the implementation of the Aarto Act, as amended, will assist in reducing the carnage on our roads, and give law enforcement officers the required tools to bring law breakers to book. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON, MR MOSEBENZI ZWANE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email:smaputi@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion.Read more