Parliament, Wednesday, 28 August 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services today called for nominations and applications for the position of Deputy Public Protector. Committee Chairperson Mr Bulelani Magwanishe said members of the public and organisations are invited to nominate suitable candidates, and interested parties may also apply by no later than 20 September 2019 at 16h00. “The position of Deputy Public Protector becomes vacant early in December when the contract of the current Deputy Public Protector, Mr Kevin Malunga, comes to an end,” Mr Magwanishe explained. Mr Magwanishe said the Office of the Public Protector is a state institution supporting constitutional democracy, established in terms of Chapter 9 of the Constitution, 1996. The Public Protector has the power to investigate any conduct in state affairs, or in the public administration in any sphere of government that is alleged or suspected to be improper or to result in any impropriety or prejudice; to report on that conduct; and take appropriate remedial action. The Public Protector has the additional powers and functions prescribed by national legislation. The Deputy Public Protector is appointed by the President on the recommendation of the National Assembly for such a period as the President may determine at the time of such appointment, but not exceeding seven years. The Deputy Public Protector may at the end of his or her term be reappointed for one additional term. The person recommended for appointment as Deputy Public Protector must be a South African citizen, who is a fit and proper person to hold such office, and who: Nominations/applications must contain a curriculum vitae (CV) providing the nominee/applicant’s: In the case of nominations, the nomination must also contain the full name, address/email address and contact details of the person or organisation making the nomination and a signed acceptance of the nomination by the nominee. A list of all the nominations/applications received will be published in order to allow members of the public to comment on the suitability of candidates. The shortlisted candidates will be subjected to a screening process. Nominations/applications must reach Mr Vhonani Ramaano, Committee Secretary, 3rd Floor, 90 Plein Street, Cape Town, 8000 / PO Box 15, Cape Town, 8001 Enquiries: Mr V Ramaano, tel: (021) 403-3820, cell: 083 709 8427, email: vramaano@parliament.gov.za ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, MR BULELANI MAGWANISHE. For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament.Read more