Parliament, Monday, 04 March 2019 –The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, has raised alarm at the allegations that are made by the father of the musician Ms Bongekile "Babes Wodumo" Simelane that Mr Mandla 'Mampintsha' Maphumulo bribed police officers at Westville Police station to ensure that his abuse of Ms Simelane is not investigated. The police's primarily role is to protect citizens and to uphold the rule of law and any acts of bribery should be investigated and prosecutions must be initiated. The committee is worried that men continue to abuse their partners and some cases never see the light of day due to such acts of bribery. "South Africa is facing a serious problem of gender based violence and one of the pillars in dealing with this scourge is a police service that is at the forefront in not only arresting perpetrators but also ensuring that cases are properly investigated to ensure effective prosecutions," Mr Beukman said. The National Commissioner of the South African Police Services (SAPS) together with the Provincial Commissioner must urgently investigate these allegations and if bribery is found to have taken place the officers concerned must be prosecuted. This will encourage women to report acts of abuse with the knowledge that proper investigation will be done. The committee remains of the view that cases of abuse of women and children must at all times receive priority from police to rid the country of these abhorrent acts. The committee encourages Ms Simelane to lodge a case immediately and work with police to ensure the earliest arrest and prosecution of Mr Maphumulo. To this effect, the committee welcomes the activation by the National Commissioner of a team to look into the matter. Furthermore, the committee has called for a societal cooperation and commitment in ending violence against women and children. "We cannot as a society stand by when abuse is meted out on women and children," Mr Beukman emphasised. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mr Malatswa Molepo
	Parliamentary Communication ServicesTel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote.Read more