Parliament, Wednesday, 06 March 2019 – The Standing Committee on Appropriations (SCOA), while noting room for improvement, said that it is satisfied with the progress the Employment Creation Facilitation Fund (Jobs Fund) has made thus far. The committee met with the National Treasury yesterday to be briefed on progress and expenditure with the fund. The committee noted the creation of 449 permanent jobs in the Northern Cape. However, this province lags behind the others and therefore should be one of the main areas for improvement. National Treasury was advised to look at increasing performance in this province. While commending the Jobs Fund for creating 20 444 internships and 55 645 short-term job opportunities, National Treasury was also advised to look at further opportunities for those who have upskilled themselves and enhanced their work experience. The Jobs Fund was launched in June 2011 with a budget of R9 billion to support initiatives that pilot innovative approaches to employment creation. The programme will come to an end in the next few years, according to National Treasury. Nonetheless, the committee Chairperson, Ms Yvonne Phosa said: “National Treasury needs to make sure that there is adequate consultation before the programme run-down is concluded, especially given our state of unemployment and slow economic growth.” “The Jobs Fund initiative was part of the rapid response by government to tackle the triple challenges of unemployment, poverty and inequalities, and is one of the critical pillars to change the socio-economic challenges of our people,” said Ms Phosa. She encouraged National Treasury to continue to ensure that there is clear value for money in the fund. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS, MS YVONNE PHOSA For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact: Name: Felicia Lombard
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”.Read more