Parliament, Saturday, 02 March 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Police will on Wednesday, 6 March 2019 receive a briefing from the Minister of Police, Minister Bheki Cele on the appointment of the current Chief Financial Officer (CFO) of the Independent Police Investigative Directorate as the Acting Executive Director of IPID for the next three months. The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman said he wrote yesterday to the Minister of Police to appear before the committee to brief it on the appointment of the Acting Head of IPID and to provide the CV and career history of the Acting Head to the committee. There is a huge responsibility on the Acting Executive Director to ensure the existence of stability at IPID and to promote the core values to ensure that investigations are conducted without favour, fear or prejudice. “IPID is an important oversight institution to root out criminality and corruption in the SAPS and metropolitan police services,” Mr Beukman emphasised. It is important to the committee that the Acting Executive Director of IPID should focus on strengthening of the effective corporate governance and accountability frameworks, sound financial management and professional investigative practice as short term priorities. The IPID needs to act in line with the IPID Act and regulations in the execution of its core mandate, and all acts of criminal behaviour of members of Saps should be properly investigated and dealt with. Mr Beukman said that the committee will also invite the top-management of IPID and the Provincial Heads to the meeting. The committee will also request a short briefing from the Acting Executive Director on his immediate plans and priorities for the Department. Mr Beukman emphasised that it was important for the committee that assurances are given by the Executive Authority and the Acting Accounting Officer that service delivery at the Department will be prioritized during the transition period leading up to appointment of a permanent Executive Director in line with the prescribed process. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)Parliamentary Communication ServicesTel: 021 403 8438Cell: 081 512 7920E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more