Parliament, Wednesday, 04 March 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Police welcomes the assurance given by the Acting Executive Director of the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid) that Ipid will continue implementing its mandate and that no cases will be abandoned as the result of a change in leadership. While is it important to ensure that investigations are undertaken without fear or favour, it is also important to the committee that Ipid’s Acting Executive Director should focus, in the short term, on strengthening corporate governance and accountability frameworks, as well as financial management and professional investigative practice. Another matter of importance is the speedy appointment of personnel in senior management positions, especially provincial heads, to assist in driving the strategic objectives of the institution. The committee has urged the acting director to work with the committee, which its commitment to supporting Ipid to deliver its mandate. Despite this, the committee is concerned by the lack security vetting of 15 of the 29 senior managers at Ipid, including the acting Executive director and has called for this vetting to take place urgently. Meanwhile, the committee has called for a stronger collaborative relationship between the South African Police Service, the South African Revenue Service and stakeholders within the tobacco industry, in efforts to eradicate the illicit cigarette market. The committee is concerned that the illicit trade in tobacco leads to the loss of revenue, which could be used to improve service delivery to the people, and may also lead to job losses, as competition is stifled. The committee also welcomes the progress made by the Directorate of Priority Crime Investigation (DPCI/the Hawks) in fighting priority crimes, but emphasised the importance of fighting corruption. “The Zondo Commission has proven invaluable in providing information that the Hawks can use in the investigation and prosecution of crimes of corruption,” said Mr Francois Beukman, the Chairperson of the Committee. To achieve this, the committee has called for skills enhancement within the commercial crimes section, to strengthen the ability of the DPCI to investigate and deliver prosecutable cases. The committee has called for the establishment and finalisation of the structure of a fully-fledged National Bureau for Illegal Firearms Control and of the South African Enforcement Bureau, which are essential in fighting the proliferation of illegal firearms and narcotics. The committee remains of the view that specialised units are central to the fight against crime. The committee has also highlighted that the DPCI needs a separate budget to empower it to do its work efficiently. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party.Read more