Parliament, Wednesday 18 September 2019 – The Provincial Whip and the Leader of the Eastern Cape Provincial Delegation to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP), Ms Nokuzola Ndongeni, told the leaders of Joe Gqabi District and Walter Sisulu local municipalities to collaborate to ensure that basic services reach the people on the ground, and the infrastructure is developed in the Walter Sisulu Local Municipality. “The constitutionally enshrined principle of intergovernmental relations demands the collaboration of all government leaders to ensure the achievement of the objective of a better life to all South Africans. Please leaders, break the silos of comfortability and begin working together for the common purpose of improving the lives of the people of Walter Sisulu Local Municipality,” stressed Ms Ndongeni. The Eastern Cape delegation to the NCOP returned to the province on Monday, 16 September 2019, for the Provincial Week Programme which normally takes place in September every year. Accompanied by Members of the Eastern Cape Legislature, the delegation was split into two groups for the purposes of reaching as many service delivery sites as possible in the Walter Sisulu and Beyers Naude local municipalities. Ms Ndongeni led the group that visited Walter Sisulu Local Municipality, which is part of Joe Gqabi District Municipality. The service delivery sites that the group visited are: Burgersdorp Sport Facility, JL De Bruin Dam, Burgersdorp Roads and Electrical Infrastructure, Maletwai Bulk Infrastructure 550 Project and Sauer Park Stadium. Among the challenges that face service delivery in the Walter Sisulu Local Municipality was the lack of technical knowledge, which according to Ms Ndongeni, was confirmed by the use of only 6% from the Municipal Infrastructure Grant in the last quarter. Ms Ndongeni urged the leadership of the municipality to use the available money for the purposes it has been appropriated for. Members of the group told the leadership of the municipality to fast-track the appointment of the Local Economic Development Officer in the municipality to ensure the facilitation of meaningful economic development in the Walter Sisulu Local Municipality. “Please ensure that the municipality has an active Local Development Officer,” appealed Ms Ndongeni. On the problem of sewage that spills over to the river because of the constant vandalism of the sewerage infrastructure, members of the group told the leaders to come up with stronger security measures to stop vandalism. On the JL De Bruin Dam which is exposed, members of the group said the dam must be fenced. Members of the group attributed problems of poor service delivery and lack of infrastructure to poor coordination of available resources and cooperation at local municipality level, and between the district and local municipalities. The Provincial Week Programme, which normally takes a week, was cut to two days in the Eastern Cape due to the Joint Sitting of Parliament taking place today.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF MS NOKUZOLA NDONGENI, LEADER OF THE EASTERN CAPE NCOP DELEGATION. 
	
	For media inquiries or interviews with the Leader of the delegation, please contact the Delegation’s Media Officer:
	Mava Lukani (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Mobile: 081 503 1840
	Email: mlukani@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more