Parliament, Wednesday, 11 September 2019 – The Ad Hoc Committee to Initiate and Introduce Legislation Amending Section 25 of the Constitution today resolved to hold a workshop with various experts on the question of land and amending the Constitution accordingly. Committee Chairperson, Dr Mathole Motshekga, said the committee would identify the best brains in South Africa on the process that the committee is going to follow, and the implications of the process in order to amend the Constitution to make it possible for the expropriation of land without compensation. Members of the committee have been invited to propose names of experts. The committee said it will take into consideration all official reports on this matter, including receiving a briefing on the summary of the reports of the Joint Constitutional Review Committee, Ad Hoc Committee on the Amendment of Section 25 in the previous Parliament, the High Level Panel and the Presidential Advisory Panel. According to the draft committee programme, the workshop with the panel of experts is likely to take place after the engagement on previous reports. The programme also includes a briefing by Parliamentary Legal Services on the legislative process of a Committee Bill, deliberations on the policy framework and a public participation process on the Bill. Dr Motshekga said the committee will do its work without fear or favour. “We will set aside politics and decide on what is in the best interest of all South Africans,” he said. The committee is expected to complete its work by 31 March 2020. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEETO INITIATE AND INTRODUCE LEGISLATION AMENDING SECTION 25, DR MATHOLE MOTSHEKGA. For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote.Read more