Parliament, Tuesday, 17 September 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Tourism today considered the draft Concept Paper on the Legislative Tourism Oversight Forum.
	
	The Legislative Tourism Oversight Forum is the brainchild of the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Tourism, Mr Supra Mahumapelo. It is part of the “Triple R” (Rebranding, Repositioning and Renewal) philosophy of the committee, which is meant to strengthen tourism at local government level and to encourage greater synergy and coordination with other government departments. This will ensure that all tourism initiatives receive support from sister government departments. It will focus on growth in the tourism sector, thereby making South Africa a preferred tourism destination in the world arena, notwithstanding that the focus will be on villages, townships and small towns (dorpies).
	
	The Legislative Tourism Oversight Forum will meet quarterly with its tourism counterparts at provincial level, thus encouraging provinces to prioritise tourism. In municipalities where there are no tourism offices, they would be encouraged to harness the potential of tourism to create jobs at local level. The Portfolio Committee on Tourism will be engaging with the Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs on this issue. The forum will also focus on assisting provinces to unblock the challenges they are facing at national and provincial levels during the forum meetings where all nine provinces with be represented.
	
	The draft Legislative Tourism Oversight Forum document was adopted by all parties of the committee and will be forwarded to the National Assembly. This forms part of the committee’s contribution to World Tourism Month and will be launched shortly.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, MR SUPRA MAHUMAPELO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns.Read more