Parliament, Friday, 27 September 2019 - The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr Amos Masondo is leading a five-member multiparty parliamentary delegation that is attending the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference to Kampala, Uganda.
	
	The conference, themed, “Adaption, engagement, and evolution of Parliaments in a rapidly changing Commonwealth”, is attended by over 500 Parliamentarians and decision-makers that will also participate in electing new leadership of the forum. The Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) was established to promote the advancement of democratic Parliamentary systems across the commonwealth of nations by, among others, enhancing knowledge, sharing of best practices and understanding of democratic governance. The CPA seeks to build an informed Parliamentary community able to deepen the Commonwealth's democratic commitment and to further co-operation amongst Parliaments and Legislatures.
	
	The annual conference allows parliamentarians to discuss critical issues and collectively develop strategies in addressing and dealing with challenges faced by the various legislatures. It further provides for learning and the transfer of knowledge. The main topic for the conference is: “Maintaining Stability, Evolution, Dynamics and Challenges of Terrorism in Eastern Africa”.
	
	Alongside the main conference, there are parallel meetings and mini-conferences where more intimate engagements of issues take place. These are: Topics of engagements will range from: The multi-party delegation is comprised of: Mr NA Masondo, MP (ANC) NCOP Chairperson and leader of Parliamentary delegation and Legislative Sector.
	Mr L Tsenoli, MP (ANC); Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly
	Ms Ngwenya, MP (ANC)
	Mr H Hoosen, MP (DA)
	Ms M Sukers, MP (ACDP) The conference will end on Saturday, 27 September 2019 ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more