Parliament, Wednesday, 18 September 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration today received a briefing from the Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation (DPME) on frontline monitoring and citizen-based monitoring tools, as well as a status report on the filing of performance agreements for Heads of Departments for the 2018/19 and 2019/20 financial years.
	
	Whilst frontline tools, such as the presidential hotline and front-line desks at government departments, monitor the quality of services at institutional and facility level, they also provide citizens with an opportunity to complain about services rendered or to query an issue. In addition, they allow government to monitor government.
	
	However, some service-related issues are complex, requiring a multi-faceted approach and a number of government departments. The committee heard that public liaison officers are not adequately capacitated to deal with such issues. Therefore, a system must be put in place to assist citizens whose queries require responses from a number of government departments.
	
	The second briefing from the DPME concerned Heads of Departments’ performance agreements for the 2018/19 and 2019/2020 financial years. Whilst the previous Employee Performance Management Development System had its focus on 80% for key results area and 20% for management, it found that some directors-general received a performance bonus even though their departments received a qualified audit. The new system deals with this issue.
	
	The deadline for signed performance agreements for directors-general, heads of department and chief executive officers is 30 November 2019. This takes into account that the performance management cycle should be linked with departmental strategic and budget planning and the Medium Term Strategic Framework.
	
	The Chairperson of the Committee, Mr Tyotyo James, called on the DPME to monitor the 165 heads of department, directors-general and chief executive officers closely, as the delivery of quality services is non-negotiable across all spheres of government.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION, MR TYOTYO JAMES.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns.Read more