Parliament, Wednesday, 04 September 2019 – The Multi-Party Women’s Caucus has noted with grave concern the recent number of media reports on gender-based violence, and wants to encourage the criminal justice system to deal harshly with perpetrators. Committee Chairperson, Ms Kate Bilankulu said: “We have seen what is happening to our mothers, sisters and daughters. They are being hunted by criminals. They are not safe anywhere anymore. Our daughters are stressed out. They feel unsafe. It has indeed been a dark period in the lives of all South African women.” She called on the criminal justice system to do all in its power to keep such criminality off our streets. “The authorities need to ensure that such criminals are where they belong, removed from society. Furthermore, once they are behind bars, it is crucial that corrective and rehabilitation programmes are completed. We sometimes tend to forget that although these perpetrators are punished, eventually some of them are let out into society again. The system needs to ensure that when they are returned to society, they are fully capable of fitting in, and never return to their old ways of crime.” The committee commended the South African Police Services for the speedy arrests of some of these perpetrators. It furthermore calls on all South Africans to assist the authorities in ensuring that criminals are not allowed to continue living amongst law abiding citizens. “We call on all law enforcement agencies to work together to ensure a safe society for all South Africans.” ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE MULTI-PARTY WOMEN’S CAUCUS, MS KATE BILANKULU. For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns.Read more