Parliament, Monday, 16 September 2019 – The Select Committee on Education and Technology, Sports and Arts and Culture welcomes, with extreme pride, the news about South Africa’s first international gold medal win at the top-level Federation of International Gymnastics (FIG) World Challenge Cup, which was held recently in Szombathely, Hungary. The medal was won by 17-year-old Caitlyn Rooskrantz.
	
	Committee Chairperson Mr Mamagase Nchabeleng said: “Ms Rooskrantz’s win should be celebrated not only as a personal achievement, but as an achievement for the country and more especially, South Africa’s women. Often we forget to appreciate and celebrate the hard work, dedication and achievements of our athletes in sporting codes that are not as prominent as rugby or soccer. This culture needs to change.”
	
	The committee extends its warmest congratulations to Ms Rooskrantz and wishes her well as she turns her attention to competitions, such as the 2019 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships and the Tokyo 2020 Olympics.
	
	Meanwhile, the committee also acknowledges with excitement the progress made by the Ndlovu Youth Choir in the America’s Got Talent television competition. The choir recently qualified for the finals, proving that South Africa’s talent extends well beyond the country’s borders.
	
	The choir hails from Limpopo Province and has showcased the country’s talent, not only through their extraordinary performances, but also in the spirit of Ubuntu that is displayed through their beautiful locally-manufactured costumes, said Mr Nchabeleng. The committee’s wishes the choir well for the upcoming finals and calls on all South Africans to show support for them on social media platforms.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND TECHNOLOGY, SPORTS AND ARTS AND CULTURE, MR MAMAGASE ELLECK NCHABELENG.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Felicia Lombard (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote.Read more