Parliament, Wednesday, 04 September 2019 – As Women’s Month came to an end in August, the country learnt of the senseless killing of Ms Uyinene Mrwetyana but also not forgetting Jesse Hess, Leighandre Jegels, Janiko Mallo, Lynette Volschenk, Meghan Cremer – some of the many women who died on account of gender-based violence. The Chairperson for the Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities, Ms Nonhlanhla Ncube-Ndaba, said women are not safe in their own country and homes. The death of women is happening in private and public spaces. “Our children and youth should be safe in all spaces of learning whether it is schools, universities, colleges and in their homes,” stated Ms Ncube-Ndaba. The responsible departments must ensure that they prioritise the safety of all learners, from early childhood development centers to institutions of higher learning. The committee condemns the death of all these innocent women and children. “We send our heartfelt condolences to their families during this difficult and painful time,” said Ms Ncube-Ndaba. The committee calls for a more comprehensive approach within Parliament to address gender-based violence and femicide. This can be achieved through inter-sectoral collaboration. Ms Ncube-Ndaba said the committee has called for harsh sentences for the perpetrators of gender-based violence and that law enforcement agencies should do their job in ensuring that perpetrators face the full might of the law. “This is too much, enough is enough, we cannot take it anymore, we seriously need to focus on the state of mental health within our country given the high levels of gender-based violence and femicide,” said Ms Ncube-Ndaba. The committee has urged the Department of Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities to expedite the process on the development of the National Strategic Plan on gender-based violence, and for the Presidential Review Committee established by the President to provide progress along with the department in this regard. A meeting will be called in the next two weeks to address this matter and civil society is urged to attend. The committee reiterates that the Department of Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities work with all key stakeholders in the fight against gender-based violence and femicide. Furthermore, the committee is concerned about the lack of a dedicated budget to address gender-based violence and femicide. The Minister of Finance should ensure that the funds allocated for gender-based violence initiatives should be ring-fenced. On the attack of African foreign nationals, the committee said it condemns the violent attacks and looting of shops, as this will affect the most vulnerable, that is, women and children. In conclusion, Ms Ncube-Ndaba was vehement in saying: “Our children should feel safe and free in public and private spaces. Our young women must feel free to dress in a manner they choose without fear of being harmed. Women should be able to love who they choose and feel free to walk away without reprisals and fear of being abused, assaulted, killed for rejecting a man.” ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WOMEN, YOUTH AND PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES, MS NONHLANHLA NCUBE-NDABA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more