Parliament, Monday, 02 September 2019 – The National Assembly will on Tuesday hold a debate on the National Women’s Day. The debate will be held under the theme Gender and Institutionalism- Towards strengthening the National Gender Machinery. The debate follows a successful first Women’s Parliament which was held last week under the same theme. August is known as Women’s Month in South Africa in honour of the 1956 women who marched against the pass laws and currently to honour women for their strength and tenacity despite the struggles they face. The details of the debate are as follows: Date: Tuesday, 3 September 2019 
	Time: 14:00 
	Venue: National Assembly Chamber, Parliament On the same day the National Council of Provinces will hold a two day committees strategic planning session at Cape Town Lodge. Some of the matters on the strategic planning programme include clarifying political priorities for the NCOP in the 6th Parliament and the year ahead and understanding and strengthening the oversight role of committees. The link to the programme
	https://www.parliament.gov.za/project-event-details/49 Photographers wishing to photograph the NA debate or media who do not have Parliamentary media access permits and who wish to be in the press gallery of the National Assembly Chamber for the debate should send their details by 17:00 today, Monday 2 September to Masego Dlula (mdlula@parliament.gov.za 081 715 9398). Details needed are full name, ID or passport number, name of media organization and contact number. Those who wish to cover the NCOP Committees Strategic Planning Session should send their details to the same contact person. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more