Parliament, Friday, 27 September 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Tourism visited the Howick tourist destination in KwaZulu-Natal yesterday where it visited the Howick Falls that are an entrance to the Gorge Walk and the Mpophomeni Cultural Village, as part of its oversight visit ahead of the World Tourism Day celebrations taking place today in the area. The committee held a meeting with about 60 stakeholders in the tourism industry that came to present their views on how to revive the once bustling Howick Falls. The challenges being faced by some of the stakeholders were first brought to the attention of the committee and were considered by the committee in one of its recent meetings in Parliament. In order to address the challenges and to familiarise itself with some of them, the committee decided to visit the area as part of its oversight programme. On reflection of the day, the Chairperson of the committee, Mr Supra Mahumapelo said that “as tourism role players we must create opportunities for all the people and remove barriers that hinder the growth and development of the sector”. Furthermore, Mr Mahumapelo said: “More importantly, we must create an avenue where cultures meet to understand and accept each other, to ensure inclusive tourism growth that benefits all the local communities. We must pursue the ideal of a non-racist, non-sexist, free and prosperous South Africa where the wealth of the country benefits all the people.” According to the committee, tourism has the ability to create jobs and entrepreneurships which will allow the previously disadvantaged people to enter into the market. Whilst the focus of the committee is on the development and sustainability of tourist destinations in villages, townships and small towns (dorpies), this will come with the transformation of the private sector allowing for new entrants. The committee calls on all the role players to ensure optimisation of the development and marketing of the existing rural and township tourism. “We have found at both destinations which we have visited today, that they have a huge untapped potential to maximise the participation of both domestic and international tourists. However, to unleash this potential, private/public partnerships and improved inter-governmental relations were identified as key drivers to make this a reality,” said Mr Mahumapelo. The committee has secured a commitment from the Mayor of Umgeni Municipality, Mr Sizwe Sokhela to develop an action plan with timelines of implementation to deal with all matters that arose today. The municipality will provide monthly progress reports on the development of the Howick Falls precinct and Mpophomeni Cultural Centre and has committed to table quarterly consolidated reports to the committee. The committee will monitor this closely. The committee called on all the spheres of government to work together to prioritise tourism in pursuit of the 21 million arrivals by 2030, as outlined in President Cyril Ramaphosa’s June 2019 State of the Nation Address. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, MR SUPRA MAHUMAPELO. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly.Read more