Parliament, Thursday, 5 September 2019 - The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development, Inkosi Zwelivelile Mandela congratulated Mr David Rakgase on his successful appeal to acquire the Nooitgedacht Farm from the state. “It is the right of every citizen to have full recourse to the law as much as it is the right of the state to determine which land parcels it should retain for strategic and non-strategic reasons,” said Inkosi Mandela. Mr Rakgase farmed on the Nooitgedacht Farm for 30 years and offered to purchase it from the state. This offer was rejected by the department. Inkosi Mandela emphasised that “we celebrate the landmark ruling because we believe in our justice system to protect the rights of citizens in cases where the state fails to implement policy”. Inkosi Mandela said: “Whilst the fat of the land glistens on the lips of the few privileged, we must ask the farm workers they evicted from the private land in Kraaifontein last month and then again from the land in Stellenbosch granted by Minister Thoko Didiza as state relief to the families who were left abandoned on the streets.” He added that the Western Cape scrapped plans to develop Porter Estate and other land parcels in the leafy suburbs of Tokai, Constantia, Oude Molen and the Northern Suburbs. Furthermore, Inkosi Mandela said: “Instead it has taken every piece of potential social space in the slums of Heideveld, Bridgetown and Hazendal, overcrowding it with colourful Melon homes duping people into believing that they are delivering whilst they're just protecting the space for the privileged few.” According to Inkosi Mandela, true champions of land reform must call upon the privileged class who owns the majority of land in South Africa, to voluntarily transfer their unutilised and fallow land for purposes of redistribution and land reform. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, LAND REFORM AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT, NKOSI ZWELIVELILE MANDELA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”.Read more