Parliament, Saturday, 07 September 2019 – The Select Committee on Education and Technology, Sports and Arts and Culture is saddened by the passing away of the former springbok star, Mr Chester Williams. According to media reports, the 49-year-old, Mr Williams sadly passed away of a heart attack on Friday, 06 September. The wing of the 1995 rugby world cup champions, played 27 test matches for Springboks. The test matches spanned from 1993 to 2000 where he scored 14 tries. He moved to the University of the Western Cape in his rugby career where he coached the university's rugby team that won the 2017 Varsity Shield. With the support of the former and first President of the Republic of South Africa, Mr Nelson Mandela, Chester Williams was part of the team that united a divided nation. In the words of the former President, "sport has the power to inspire. It has the power to unite people in a way that little else does. It speaks to youth in a language they understand. Sport can create hope where there was only despair". Mr Chester Williams will always be remembered for his contribution through rugby in building and inspiring the South African nation. Mr Chester Williams was also invited to be the bearer of the 2004 Olympic torch on its way to Athens. As part of his legacy, Mr Williams recently launched the Chester’s Lager beer which is to be sold during the 2019 Rugby World Cup in Japan. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Mamagase Nchabeleng said: "We have lost a sport legend, a mentor and a guiding light." The loss of Chester, he said, reverberates through the country, and his legacy will live on through many people he inspired. The committee extends its sincere condolences to the family and friends of Mr Williams. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND TECHNOLOGY, SPORTS AND ARTS AND CULTURE, MR MAMAGASE ELLECK NCHABELENG For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”.Read more