Parliament, Friday, 13 December 2019 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Health Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo has congratulated the Department of Health for hosting the Universal Health Coverage Day celebrations. The Department of Health in partnership with the World Health Organisation (WHO) celebrated this day and successfully marked the significance of the universal health coverage. On 12 December 2012, the United Nations unanimously endorsed the universal health coverage as a pillar of sustainable development and global security. The first Universal Health Coverage Day was celebrated in 2014. Dr Dhlomo, accompanied by two Members of the Committee, Dr Pumza Dyantyi and Dr Kenneth Jacobs, joined the celebrations that took place yesterday in Johannesburg and welcomed the initiative by the department. The WHO commended the strides that have been made by the Department of Health in the country towards universal health coverage, and urged it to accelerate the processes of translating it into actual provision of quality healthcare to the people. “South Africa must not be left behind” Dr Dhlomo stressed. During the event, there were congratulatory messages from countries that have pioneered this programme, countries such as Thailand, the United Kingdom, Norway and Chile. The messages included a message from the World Bank and were well received by the participants in the programme of celebrations of the commemoration of the day. Dr Dhlomo urged the WHO to continue its activism and its call to the world on universal health coverage because the citizens in countries where there is no universal health coverage will always migrate to countries where it exists. “It is important for the WHO to continue its call for the programme as it certainly assist in limiting the migration of people to other countries in search of better life,” added Dr Dhlomo. The committee called for written submissions from the public on the National Health Insurance Bill and the closing date was 29 November 2019. The committee has already conducted public hearings on the Bill in five provinces, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, Limpopo, KwaZulu Natal and the Eastern Cape. It will conclude the public hearings in the remaining last four provinces, Gauteng, Free State, North West and Western Cape in late January to early February 2020. The objective of the Bill is to achieve universal access to quality healthcare services in South Africa in accordance with section 27 of the Constitution. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, DR SIBONGISENI DHLOMO. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za Anybody over the age of 18 can participate indirectly in Parliament simply by voting in the elections.Read more