Swakopmund, Saturday 14 December 2019 – National Assembly Speaker Ms Thandi Modise has, today, welcomed the historic readmission of Madagascar into the Southern African Development Community Parliamentary Forum. A 2009 extraordinary summit of SADC, chaired by then President of South Africa Mr Kgalema Motlanthe, suspended Madagascar “from all community institutions and organs (of SADC) until the return of the country to constitutional order.“ The suspension was lifted by the extra-ordinary summit of the SADC Heads of State and Government in 2014. Madagascar was today, at the plenary meeting of the SADC-PF, readmitted into the regional bloc following the passing of a motion put forward by the Speaker of the Seychelles National Assembly, Mr Nicholas Prea. “This is a welcome relief for us as South Africa as this move bolsters our efforts to strengthen unity in the region. Madagascar will remain our important strategic partner as we have cordial bilateral relations with the people of the island,” said Speaker Modise. Diplomatic relations between South Africa and Madagascar were established in 1994 and the two countries have signed a number of bilateral agreements. Madagascar is also part of the group of African and Indian Ocean countries that are in partnership with SA in developing the groundbreaking scientific project, the Square Kilometre Array (SKA). The return of Madagascar brings to 15 the number of national Parliaments that are members of the SADC-PF with only the Parliament of the Union of Comoros remaining to complete the family of legislatures in the SADC region. The Speaker is currently leading a 5-member Parliament delegation of Members of Parliament to the Southern African Development Community Parliamentary Forum (SADC-PF) 46th Plenary Assembly Session that is being held in Swakopmund, Namibia, from the 11th to the 16th of December 2019. Other members of the delegation are Ms Kate Bilankulu, Mr Desmond Moela, Ms Siviwe Gwarube and Mr Tshitereke Matibe. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”.Read more