Parliament, Monday, 9 December 2019 – The Collins Chabane, Mogalakwena and the Greater Tzaneen local municipalities appeared before the Portfolio Committee on Cooperative and Traditional Affairs recently at Parliament to brief the committee on progress on what the committee directed the municipalities to do after its October oversight visit programme in the municipalities.
	
	The leadership of the Greater Tzaneen Local Municipality which appeared before the committee to brief the committee on the general state of the municipality, took more time briefing the committee on the flawed precautionary suspension of the Municipal Manager.
	
	It emerged from the briefing that the suspension of the Municipal Manager was orchestrated by those who benefitted from the Codesa and Maluti road construction projects and which the Municipal Manager had terminated due to fraud on the part of the service providers.
	
	The committee noted that the interference of the political leadership in administrative matters and obstruction of the senior management from performing its fiduciary responsibilities is a common trend in the local municipalities. Also, the committee noted that the Mayor of the Greater Tzaneen Local Municipality was not asserting his authority adequately, and according to the committee he allowed the Speaker and the Chief Whip of the municipality to dictate.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Faith Muthambi told the Mayor, Mr Maripe Mangena who led the delegation that he failed to provide leadership. Ms Muthambi said: “Failure to follow the law in the suspension of the Municipal Manager and eventual payment of legal cost by the municipality as a result of that failure, is a concrete evidence of your failure to lead Mayor.” Admitting his failure to lead, the Mayor assured the committee about correcting the mistakes of the council and to be in charge.
	
	The leadership of Collins Chabane Local Municipality that was also led by the mayor of the municipality briefed the committee on, among other things, Auditor General’s report on fruitless and wasteful expenditure, the recovery plan of the R120 million that was invested in VBS Mutual Bank, vacancy rate of 69% in the municipality, occupation of satellite offices by municipal staff members who do nothing, reliance of the municipality on consultants for financial statements and lack of service delivery in Vuwani.
	
	The committee heard that great progress has been made by the municipality on most of the issues. However, the committee expressed its unhappiness about the little progress it heard on the civil recovery process regarding the R120 million investment the municipality made to the VBS Mutual Bank. The committee told the leadership of the municipality to accelerate the recovery process as it was assured about the capacity and the effectiveness of the Municipal Public Accounts Committee.
	
	The Mogalakwena Local Municipality will appear again next year as due to load shedding the meeting had to adjourn.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, MS FAITH MUTHAMBI.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	Email: sgovender@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns.Read more