Parliament, Wednesday, 11 December 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans is saddened by the passing of the Chief of the South African Army, Lieutenant General Thabiso Mokhosi. Chairperson of the Committee, Mr Cyril Xaba described “the passing of Lieutenant General Mokhosi as a great loss to the Defence Force as a whole. His passing leaves behind a gaping hole that will be difficult to fill." Lieutenant General Mokhosi who passed away at the Unitas hospital in Pretoria on Tuesday, 10 December 2019, formerly served as the General Officer Commanding of Joint Operations Division. His recent promotion to Lieutenant General in November 2019 allowed him to assume the role of Chief of the South African Army, a role he filled with diligence and pride said Mr Xaba. Mr Xaba said that “his contributions to the armed forces span more than three decades, his extensive training started with basic military training in Angola in 1985 where he continued to improve and excel in courses such as the advanced engineering demolition course at Simferopol Military Combined Arms College in Ukraine and the ASC-6 course in operational logistics at ASC School in Bareilly, Italy in 1992”. One of his most recent achievements includes the completion of the International Security and Strategy courses at the Royal College of Defence in London. Lieutenant General Mokhosi will be remembered for his belief and dedication to personal development which influenced his service to his country. His achievements and life-long dedication to serving the people of SA are enshrined in the strides towards creating an effective and disciplined military force. The committee extends its sincere condolences to the President of the Republic, the Chief of the Defence Force, General Solly Shoke, the family and friends of Lieutenant General Mokhosi, and to the entire armed services on this immense loss. He will be gravely missed. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS, MR CYRIL XABA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Felicia Lombard (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more