Parliament, Sunday, 1 December 2019 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Health, Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, joins the citizens of the world in commemorating the 2019 World AIDS Day which is commemorated under the theme “Communities make the difference – Cheka Impilo”. Dr Dhlomo said this day is a reminder of the critical role played by the communities in the fight against HIV, TB and STIs. “The fight against HIV, TB and STIs can only be won when communities realise the important role they can play, and commit themselves fully to that role. The supportive role by communities to people living with HIV/AIDS is also a key pillar in this overall war against HIV,” Dr Dhlomo said. Dr Dhlomo emphasised that communities should play a leading and meaningful role in dispelling all forms of stigma against people living with HIV/AIDS and other diseases. The commemoration of this year’s World Aids Day follows the launch of the new HIV treatment regime Tenofovir, Lamivudine and Dolutegravir (TLD) by the Minister of Health, Dr Zweli Mkhize. Important strides like this, Dr Dhlomo said, represent the depth of the commitment of the South African government in the fight against HIV. “But the government cannot do it alone, South Africans are encouraged to join in this global endeavour in support of the government because collaboration is essential if we are to achieve the common objective,” added Dr Dhlomo. It remains important, Dr Dhlomo said, to highlight that the continued rollout of a basket of interventions such achieving the target of additional 2 million people on treatment by 2020, increasing of HIV education, counselling and testing, medical male circumcision and many other strategies remain critical in the broader scheme of strategies against HIV. “As we commemorate World AIDS Day, I would like to acknowledge the sterling work by the Community Health Workers across the country. Their contribution should stimulate other South Africans to join and be part of this drive against HIV,” Dr Dhlomo said. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, DR SIBONGISENI DHLOMO For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more