Parliament, Sunday, 1 December 2019 – Parliament’s Presiding Officers led by National Assembly Speaker, Ms Thandi Modise and the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr Amos Masondo join South Africans and the world in commemorating the International World Aids day.
	
	The theme for this World Aids Day “Communities make the difference” is a reminder of the significant and important role communities play in supporting and educating about HIV/Aids. The theme further encourages South African social value system and spirit of Ubuntu that focuses on compassion, solidarity and respect for dignity.
	
	“This day calls on all of us to strongly unite in the fight against the spread of HIV/Aids. It is a reminder to deepen our work within communities we live and be active citizens by engaging in various tasks that will ultimately lead to meaningful contributions towards eradicating the epidemic”, said the Presiding Officers.
	
	HIV/AIDS continues to be a global health issue as more than 37.9 million people are living with HIV and as of June 2019, 24.5 million were accessing antiretroviral therapy. In South Africa, more than 7 700 000 adults and children are living with the virus.
	
	“This day coincides with the Portfolio Committee on Health’s National Health Insurance (NHI) Bill public hearings currently taking place in the Eastern Cape. The Bill is intended to achieve universal access to healthcare services to all South Africans and will ensure that people are provided with essential healthcare regardless of their social standing in society. We urge communities to participate in these hearings when they come to their respective areas”, added the Presiding Officers.
	
	The World Aids Day also falls within the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence against Women and Children, a campaign to oppose violence against women and children. The campaign aims to raise awareness on the negative impact that violence and abuse have on women and children and to rid society of the scourge permanently.
	
	Parliament encourages all South Africans to continuously check their health status, be active citizens that advocate daily the social value systems of Ubuntu by showing compassion to all. Further, urge everyone to be responsible citizens and prevent the spread of HIV/AIDs. As a nation, we must continuously fight the scourge of violence against women and children.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more