Swakopmund, Sunday 15 December 2019 – Parliament’s delegation to the 46th Plenary Assembly Session of the Southern African Development Community Parliamentary Forum (SADC-PF) has welcomed the adoption of a report proposing the development of a model law on gender-based violence against women and girls.
	
	When presenting the report today Ms Kate Bilankulu, an SA delegate who is also the Vice-Chairperson of the Regional Women’s Parliamentary Caucus (RWPC) of the SADC-PF, said: “The envisioned SADC Model Law on Gender-based Violence should provide for innovative preventative interventions to address the structural and underlying causes and risk factors related to Gender-Based Violence relevant to the SADC Region.”
	
	Ms Bilankulu called for a renewed focus on the prevention of gender-based violence, in line with the 2013 CSW Resolution 57 on “Elimination and Prevention of All Forms of Violence against Women and Girls”, which amongst others, calls on States to address the structural and underlying causes and risk factors to prevent violence against women and girls.
	
	Another SA delegate to the Assembly, Ms Siviwe Gwarube said the Model Law can go a long way to curb this crisis, but addressing gender-based violence requires behavioural change.
	
	“Women are not killing themselves - they are being abused by perpetrators who live, work and walk among us. A model law will send a strong message, but a stronger message will be sent by leaders who lead by example,” said Ms Gwarube adding that South Africa supports the proposed model law and called on the entire SADC PF to embrace and adopt it.
	
	The governments and parliaments in the SADC Region have developed and adopted various policy and legislative frameworks to jointly address this abuse that transcends borders, race, culture, and nationalities – the most recent being the SADC Regional Gender-Based Violence Strategy 2018 – 2030.
	
	According to Gender Links’ SADC Gender Protocol 2018 Barometer report, 12 of the 14 SADC Member States have passed domestic violence legislation, 13 have passed sexual assault legislation, 13 Member States have passed sexual harassment laws, and all SADC-PF Member States have passed human trafficking laws.
	
	Ms Gwarube stressed the importance of “challenging the SADC PF, particularly the men who are all representatives in their countries to lead by example.”
	
	The Beijing Declaration Platform for Action, adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women in September 1995, defines violence against women as “any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or private life.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping.Read more