Parliament Friday, 06 December 2019 – The Speakers’ Forum of the Republic of South Africa that met on Thursday, 5 December 2019 welcomes the Executive and Legislative Remuneration Review Report presented by the Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers in the last meeting of the forum held in Pretoria East.
	
	The Speakers’ Forum meeting that was chaired by the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) Chairperson, Mr Amos Masondo, appreciated the comprehensive briefing that covered the restructuring of remuneration packages and benefits of Members of Parliament, the Executive, Judiciary and other political office bearers, as part of the annual reviews with recommendations ultimately submitted to the President for approval.
	
	Presenting the report, the delegation of the Commission led by the newly appointed Chairperson, Judge President Monica Leeuw, stressed that the review is intended to address historical discrepancies in the Legislative Sector, covering the alignment of job descriptions, the scope of work, allowances and benefits of public office bearers. Presiding Officers from South Africa’s 11 legislative institutions and their deputies welcomed the thoroughness and the quality of the report and expressed their views for consideration by the commission. Of concern was the high and uncompetitive costs of Parliament’s closed medical aid scheme when compared to various open options available on the market. The Speakers’ Forum has undertaken to take the report back to their respective Legislatures for inputs, which will be consolidated by the Speakers’ Forum and submitted to the Commission for consideration.
	
	Commenting about the session, NCOP Chairperson Mr Amos Masondo, described the meeting as productive and inspiring with the Reference Groups of the Speakers’ Forum adding a practical dimension to the work of the legislative sector. “We are emerging out of this session with a clear roadmap and time frames for getting the required results, that would help change the quality of lives of the people of South Africa,” said Mr Masondo.
	
	The Speakers’ Forum, which meets quarterly, also considered five reports submitted by its structures, called Reference Groups, as well as a presentation of the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly Mr Lechesa Tsenoli. Mr Tsenoli presented a progress report on the longstanding mission of converting the Association of Public Accounts Committees (APAC) from being a Non-Profit Organisation (NPO) to an autonomous committee that accounts to the Speakers’ Forum. The forum raised the urgency of concluding this task while continuing to strengthen their capacity to effectively hold various state organs accountable.
	
	The Speakers Forum also hailed the conclusion and signing of an agreement by the legislative bodies with labour to establish a central National Bargaining Forum (NBF) that seeks to align and better manage the sector’s human capital and labour relations. The NBF which will handle the next round of salary negotiations will also work tirelessly towards setting a fully-fledged National Bargaining Council of the Legislative Sector, in line with the provision of the Labour Relations Act.
	
	The 22 member forum, most of whom are new, went through an induction programme in October and also appointed four Reference Groups to deal with clusters of legislatures’ work, viz. Governance and Administration; Oversight, Public Participation and Law-making; Local Government and International Relations; as well as capacity and Knowledge Development. The newly established structures worked hard and presented progress reports that covered, inter alia: Mr Masondo also thanked members of the Speakers’ Forum, members of the Legislatures for their hard work during 2019. He wished all members, staff of the Legislative Sector, and the public at large a safe, joyful festive season and a well-deserved rest. To those selfless and hardworking South Africans who would be on duty to save lives, strength and blessings as they seek to ameliorate pain and suffering of those affected by crime, road accidents and other misfortunes. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA ON BEHALF OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN LEGISLATIVE SECTOR Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them.Read more