Parliament, Sunday, 8 December 2019 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Tourism, and the former North West Premier, Mr Supra Mahumapelo today visited the Legae family in Seweding Village near Mahikeng to offer it support after the recent brutal killing of its 18-year-old daughter, Gomolemo Legae. Gomolemo was stabbed and later burned by a known 19-year-old male companion. Mr Mahumapelo said that this incident reflects a deeper need for safety and security for young people, in particular women in places of entertainment. Mr Mahumapelo said: "The delay by the emergency services in responding to the call to assist Gomolemo is an indictment on us as government. There is a need to render services with a faster speed." He added that there is a need for more volunteers to ensure that,as young people entertain themselves, they do so in a safe environment. Technology should be accessible to young people and should be used to enhance communication in situations of this nature. Furthermore, Mr Mahumapelo said, young people and the community structures should be better organised and should service the young people better. "Education of the young boys and girls is critical as they grow up. They should be taught to appreciate and protect themselves. As we are approaching the end of the 16 Days of Activism against Gender Based Violence, we must reiterate the call that says “Enough is Enough”, and we will lend our support to the 365 Days Behavioural Change Campaignm." Emphasised Mr Mahumapelo. He said heinous crimes must not be allowed to continue to destroy the communities. The chief executive officer of the Tsetsepela People's Foundation advocate Tumelo Pheto accompanied Mr Mahumapelo who is the chairperson and the founder of the foundation. The foundation has undertaken to assist the family in legal matters relating to the case of their daughter. The family further informed Mr Mahumapelo that it would like to attend the memorial service of its daughter which is being planned for Thursday 12 December 2019 in Itsoseng, it does not have travelling means to attend. The Tsetsepela People's Foundation committed to assist the family with transport to attend the memorial service of their daughter. "As the Chairperson of the Portfolio Commitee on Tourism, we would do all that is possible to make South Africa a safe place for our people and tourists, said Mr Mahumapelo. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, MR SUPRA MAHUMAPELO. Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns.Read more