Parliament, Tuesday, 3 December 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Tourism today held a meeting where the concept and terms of reference for the formation of the Parliament-Legislatures Tourism Oversight Forum was presented and discussed. This is the first for Parliament to have a combined forum.
	The tourism function is a concurrent function, with all spheres of government responsible for tourism within their areas of jurisdiction, and therefore such a forum will greatly assist the coordination and synergy of tourism.
	
	In this 6th term of Parliament, the Portfolio Committee on Tourism adopted the RRR working philosophy of Rebranding, Repositioning and Renewal to harness the energies of all tourism stakeholders to ensure that South Africa takes its rightful place in the global community and that all barriers to tourism growth are eradicated.
	
	The Parliament-Legislatures Tourism Oversight Forum will focus its efforts on villages, townships and small towns (dorpies). The legislatures present at the meeting have given their support to the forum, and going forward, a Memorandum of Understanding will be drafted and circulated to provinces for their input before the close of business by Parliament for the year.
	
	“As the Chairperson for the Tourism Portfolio Committee, I want to commend the Facebook group ‘Taking RSA to the World’, a group with more than 20 000 women members founded by Ncumisa Fandesi-Ndelu, who loves South Africa and who thinks this country is the most beautiful place to live in. This group voluntarily promotes domestic tourism and more importantly, promotes SA to the world when its members travel. These women are our tourism ambassadors and we thank them for this campaign.
	
	“As we are close to the Christmas travel season, we want all South Africans and our tourists to enjoy our beautiful sights and be safe on the roads. I also want to call on South Africans to warmly welcome our tourists and show them the hospitality that we are known for,” said the Chairperson.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, MR SUPRA MAHUMAPELO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party.Read more