Parliament, Wednesday, 13 February 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training has noted the hard work done by the Department of Higher Education and Training and the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) Administrator to address wide-ranging student demands in the tertiary sector. Representatives from the South African Union of Students (Sasu), Universities SA and NSFAS were in Parliament to brief the committee on the current situation at universities. The Chairperson Ms Connie September said there was a need for consensus on student demands, as they are legitimate. “The demands are not insurmountable and it appears everyone is on the same page. There is also general acceptance that resolving all these issues cannot be immediate and may require the students to make some compromises.” The committee welcomed the presentations. Both Universities SA and Sasu pointed to historical student debt, accommodation, academic exclusions and increases in higher education costs as problems that are common to all tertiary institutions. Universities SA allayed the committee’s fears on academic exclusions by saying that no academically deserving students are turned away if they do not have registration fees. The committee will conduct oversight visits to hear first-hand instances of academically deserving students being turned away. Ms September said the committee is concerned that university councils are not meeting to discuss these issues. The committee will write to chairs of councils about this and have meaningful engagements with all stakeholders. Regarding accommodation, the committee believes that the private sector should play a meaningful role, to complement what government is doing to provide funding. However, the committee also condemns the destruction of property and violence on South African campuses. Ms September reminded the meeting that the National Development Plan calls for consensus seeking in education and she called on all stakeholders, led by the Minister, to facilitate this. She also said some of challenges could be addressed through the fee-free policy regime. The committee will write to the Speaker for clarity on the matter between the department and the Office of the Public Protector’s remedial action for the Tshwane South College. Ms September also believes that the yearly election of student representative councils does not support stability at many tertiary institutions. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING, MS CONNIE SEPTEMBER. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”.Read more