Parliament, Wednesday, 20 February 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture spoke out strongly against the use of public funds in the many disciplinary and legal processes involving entities of the Department of Arts and Culture. The department was briefing the committee about the forensic investigations into corruption and collusion at seven of its entities. The investigations have revealed serious failures to speedily resolve disciplinary cases, many of which involve the chief executive officers (CEO) and chief financial officers (CFO) of these entities. The committee is frustrated because it has spoken against these issues on many occasions. The committee also questioned the continuous delays in the investigation into the National Arts Council’s CFO, saying that these delays are a waste of public funds. The hearing on this matter is scheduled for 14 and 15 March 2019, although the CFO tendered her resignation on 21 January 2019 and is currently working out her three-month notice. The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Xoliswa Tom, said the delays highlight the department’s failure to administer its entities effectively. The committee also emphasised the need for stability at the Performing Arts Centre of the Free State (Pacofs). Pacofs staff have made serious allegations against the CFO and the supply-chain manager relating to collusion in procuring tenders. In the case of the Pan South African Language Board (PanSALB), the committee heard that disciplinary proceedings against the CFO are being finalised. A report of the investigations against both the CFO and the CEO will be given to the new Board upon its appointment. The committee noted the necessity of this process, but warned that this might present a challenge for the new board. The committee also pointed out that an interim board might be necessary in such instances. Ms Tom told department officials to find a legal framework to ensure that they deal effectively with the challenges at its entities. She also emphasised the need for entities to direct their focus to the implementation of their mandates, as a failure to do so is a disservice to the many beneficiaries of these entities and the entire arts community. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ARTS AND CULTURE, MS XOLISWA TOM. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Felicia Lombard
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more