Parliament, Sunday 14 July 2019 – A total of 12 votes budget votes of Parliament, the Presidency, other departments and state entities are scheduled for debate in the National Assembly this week, while the National Council of Provinces is scheduled to hold five policy debates on budget votes. Parliament’s budget vote is scheduled for debate on Tuesday, at a plenary sitting of the National Assembly starting at 14.00. The National Council of Provinces is scheduled to hold a policy debate on Tuesday on Parliament’s budget vote at its plenary sitting, also starting at 14.00. The Presidency’s budget vote is scheduled for debate on Wednesday at a plenary sitting of the National Assembly starting at 14.00. The President will then reply to the debate on Thursday, at a National Assembly plenary sitting scheduled for 15.30. In the National Assembly, at least 10 mini-plenary sittings are scheduled this week to debate the budget votes of departments and state entities. Six mini-plenary sittings are scheduled for Tuesday, three for Wednesday and one for Thursday. On Thursday, after the reply by the President to debate on the Presidency budget vote, the National Assembly plenary sitting is scheduled also to consider various reports on budget votes. Besides its debate on Parliament’s budget vote, the National Council of Provinces is scheduled to hold another four policy debates on budget votes at its plenary sittings this week. One of these four has been scheduled for Tuesday, two for Wednesday and one for Thursday. Budget votes are part of Parliament’s oversight function, which includes scrutinising government revenue collection, budget allocation, spending and ensuring service delivery priorities are reflected in the budget as a whole and in the budgets of national government departments and entities. The public has a role to play in this process and can have a say on the Appropriation Bill, which allocates funds to different government departments and entities of the state. Amongst parliamentary committees scheduled this week is a joint meeting of the Standing Committee on Appropriations and the Select Committee on Appropriations, which will hold a public hearing on the Appropriation Bill [B6-2019]. This joint meeting will also receive a briefing from the National Treasury (and the Parliamentary Budget Office) on Treasury’s proposed amendments and technical corrections to the Appropriation Bill and receive responses from National Treasury on submissions made on the 2019 Appropriation Bill. Other parliamentary committees taking place this week include the following: TUESDAY Select Committee on Trade and Industry, Economic Development, Small Business Development, Tourism, Employment and Labour: Briefing by the Parliamentary Legal Services on the technical amendment effected to the National Minimum Wage Act; way forward on the National Minimum Wage Amendment Bill [B9-2019] WEDNESDAY Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration: Department of Public Service and Administration briefing on the approved Ministerial Handbook; Department of Public Service and Administration briefing on the present and prospective state of the public service staff complement after reconfiguration: early retirements, severance packages and migrations Select Committee on Public Enterprises and Communication: Department of Public Enterprises briefing on its Annual Performance Plan and Strategic Plan Select Committee on Security and Justice: Briefing by Minister of Police on policy matters; briefing by Department on budget and Annual Performance Plan Select Committee on Appropriations and Select Committee on Finance: Committees’ induction, with presentations on committee rules; sector Issues; Legacy Reports; Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act; and the role of the Parliamentary Budget Office FRIDAY Standing Committee on Appropriations: Consideration of the committee’s draft report on the 2019 Appropriation Bill; consideration of the proposed amendments to the 2019 Appropriation Bill; adoption of committee’s draft minutes; and consideration of the committee’s programme for term 2 (sixth Parliament) For the latest full schedule of committee meetings (updated regularly), please click:https://www.parliament.gov.za/whatson ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICAEnquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more