Parliament, Tuesday, 16 July 2019 – The Select Committee on Health and Social Services implored the Department of Social Development to follow the money that it transfers to provinces and organisations. The committee was briefed by the Department of Social Development on its strategic plan and budget vote. The Chairperson of the Committee, Ms Maurencia Gillion, said: “We transfer huge amounts of money to the provinces and organisations, how do we ensure the money is being utilised for the budgeted programmes?” The committee said the department needs to have mechanisms in place to monitor the funds that have been allocated to provinces, non-governmental organisations and non-profit organisations. The committee was of the view that the Minister must provide oversight to the monies transferred to provinces. The committee questioned if the department is collaborating with other government departments in ensuring that the programmes it has, are being effectively implemented. Although the department drafts certain plans and programmes, the committee said it (the department) will not have the capacity to implement, for instance, the Drug Master Plan. The department needs to work with the South African Police Service. The committee expressed its concern about the lack of compliance with the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA). The matter was highlighted in the fifth Parliament. The committee said this is a matter that worries the committee. The committee was of the view that people need to stick to National Treasury guidelines and regulations. On early childhood development (ECD), the committee noted that the programme will be moved to the Department of Basic Education. The committee said even though there will be a move, Social Development still has a role to play in ensuring the welfare of the kids and funding of the ECD programmes. The committee asked which components will be moved to basic education, what will the Department of Education be receiving, is it assets or liabilities that are being moved? The committee said the levels of crime in the Western Cape are concerning and disturbing. Criminals are intensifying their activities. The Army has been brought in to assist in the fight against crime. The committee is of the view that this cannot be a long-term solution. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES, MS MAURENCIA GILLION. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu 
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”.Read more