PARLIAMENT COMMITTEES LAUNCH THEIR TWITTER ACCOUNTS
	 
	Parliament, Wednesday, 31 July 2019 – National Assembly (NA) House Chairperson for Committees, Mr Cedrick Frolick, and NCOP House Chairperson for Committees, Mr Jomo Nyambi are pleased to announce the launch of Twitter accounts for both NA and NCOP Committees as one of the mechanisms of enhancing meaningful public participation.
	 
	The Constitution enjoins Parliament to facilitate public participation in all its business, thus committees are charged with the responsibility of ensuring that Parliament’s constitutional function of law-making, public involvement and oversight is realised.
	 
	The sixth democratic Parliament, as an activist and caring people’s Parliament, is taking this route in order to open access to its business, through the committees, and seeks to involve all the citizens of our country in the formulation of legislation. The accounts will also enable Parliament to exercise better oversight on the executive, with guidance from the beneficiaries of the services offered by various government departments.
	 
	The Twitter accounts will enable members of the public to participate in the business of the committees by responding to invitations for public comments, in writing, for Bills or any matters before the committees. The accounts can also be used to make representations or recommendations to the committees on Bills or any other matters before the committees.
	 
	“This is one of the mechanisms of reaching out to South Africans in the spirit of participatory democracy to enhance active participation, more so the young people who are techno-savvy, in the business Parliament,” said the House Chairpersons.
	 
	This initiative is also in line with the social media guidelines issued by the Inter-Parliamentary Union which encourage all member Parliaments “to go where the people are.” It sees social media platforms as tools to encourage dialogue between citizens and parliamentarians with the “potential to foster greater respect for democracy and democratic institutions” while promoting participation and “greater accountability.”
	 
	A total of 43 twitter accounts for various Portfolio and Select Committees have been opened to enhance direct communication and inter-active participation between citizens and parliamentary committees.
	 
	The accounts are: ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”.Read more