Parliament, Tuesday, 9 July 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Basic Education today received a briefing from the Department of Basic Education on its Annual Performance Plan. The committee agreed that it would discuss safety in South African schools.
	
	Committee Chairperson Ms Bongiwe Mbingo-Gigaba said the committee is very aware of what appears to be increasing violence in schools. “As a committee, we will discuss violence in schools. We commend the Minister and the department for the sector and national plan in place to address violence in schools. We further note that addressing violence in schools falls into the competencies of the provincial education department.”
	
	During the presentation, Minister Angie Motshekga said although all parties are aware of violence in schools – involving both learners on learners and learners on educators – it is important not to militarise schools. The committee heard that schools must remain gun-free zones. Schools have been informed to start with basic safety measures, as some school properties are not fenced.
	
	Ms Mbingo-Gigaba said the committee will do everything in its power to assist all role-players to ensure that schools are places of safety where education can take place without fear of death or injury. “We agree that this requires a multi-sectoral approach and plan. Violence occurs in our communities and spills over into schools. This is a societal issues and must be addressed by us collectively to ensure a better and brighter future for all learners.”
	
	In terms of the budget, the committee heard that although it receives a budget of more than R24.5 billion, only around R6 billion remains with the National Department, with the bulk being transferred to the different provincial departments of education. These budgets are not always spent on what they are allocated for, such as infrastructure. The committee heard that departments tend to move funds from one programme to another when the funds in one programme are finished.
	
	The committee commended the department for its plan to develop and adopt a National Reading Plan for primary schools by the end of this year. Among other things, this plan aims to encourage schools, parents and communities in the target areas to establish a reading culture, to establish partnerships, and raise funds to support the plan and to deepen reading norms in order to strengthen existing curriculum delivery.
	
	“This is definitely a step in the right direction in order to ensure that our learners read with understanding and comprehension. We will monitor this target and plan closely,” said Ms Mbingo-Gigaba.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS BONGIWE MBINGO-GIGABA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more