Parliament, Wednesday, 10 July 2019 – The Standing Committee on the Auditor-General (SCOAG) insist that the payments for the work done by the Auditor-General should be observed by those who are being audited. The committee believes that auditees must budget for such work and should ensure that the Office of the Auditor-General is paid what is due to it.
	
	The committee today received a briefing on the legacy report of the fifth Parliament. Among the challenges experienced by the Office of the Auditor-General is its funding model that relies on audit fees in exclusion of benefit from the fiscus. This has resulted in the AG experiencing a large number of outstanding debts from its auditees particularly from local government.
	
	As a result, the committee wants to look at the funding of the Office of the Auditor-General which is based on tariff charges. Seemingly the tariff outlook is below market value though the committee would probe the Auditor- General further on this matter, so that the committee can enhance its argument for the benefit of the Auditor- General from the national fiscus.
	
	The committee is also aware that the Auditor-General’s work has been further enabled through the amendment of the Public Audit Act. As a result of this the Auditor-General has drafted regulations and the submission has been made to the Office of the Speaker. The committee has committed itself to approach the Office of the Speaker for the speedy finalization of such regulations for full implementation of the Act.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL, MR SAKHUMZI SOMYO.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly.Read more