Parliament, Tuesday, 9 July 2019 – The National Council of Provinces (NCOP) at its sitting today elected delegates to fill positions on the Pan-African Parliament (PAP), the Southern African Development Community Parliamentary Forum (SADC-PF), the South African Judicial Services Commission (JSC) and the Magistrates Commission.
	
	The Pan-African Parliament (PAP) is a legislative organ of the African Union (AU), set out by the Treaty Establishing the African Economic Community (Abuja Treaty). The PAP, led by Mr Roger Nkodo Dang as President, from Cameroon, is a platform where delegates from Member Parliaments of the AU are involved in discussions and decision-making on the problems and challenges facing the continent. The NCOP elected the following delegates who will ensure full participation of the South African people in the development and economic integration of the continent: The NCOP also elected six delegates to represent the South African Parliament at the Southern African Development Community Parliamentary Forum (SADC-PF). The SADC-PF, which is currently led by Ms Verónica Nataniel Macamo Dlhovo, the Speaker of the Assembly of the Republic of Mozambique, is a delivery-focused, people-centered institution that accelerates and promotes parliamentary participation in regional decision-making for the benefit of the citizens of the Southern African Development Community. The NCOP elected the following members to serve in the SADC-PF: The NCOP further elected eight of its members to serve in the South African Judicial Service commission and the Magistrates Commission. The participation of the NCOP at these bodies gives meaning to the mandate of the NCOP, which ensures that the interests of the provinces are taken into consideration in the national sphere of government. The elected delegates to serve in the JCS are therefore drawn from the provinces.
	
	The elected NCOP delegates to serve in the Judicial Services Commission are: The JSC was established in terms of section 178 of the Constitution and consists of 23 members. In terms of section 178 (5) of the Constitution, the JSC is entitled to advise the national government on any matters relating to the Judiciary or administration of justice.
	The four NCOP delegates who will serve in the Magistrates Commission, including names of members who will replace them when they are unable to do so for any reasons, are: The Magistrates Commission is a statutory body established in terms of the Magistrates Act, 1993, and some of its objectives are: to advise the Minister regarding the appointment of magistrates, advise or to make recommendations to, or report to the Minister for information of Parliament regarding any matter which is of interest for the independence in the dispensing of justice and the efficiency of the administration of justice in the Magistrates’ Courts and to carry out investigations and make recommendations to the Minister regarding the suspension and removal from office of magistrates. The National Assembly has already elected its members to serve in these bodies. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more