Parliament, Tuesday, 9 July 2019 – The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) is ready to start working and to deal with the outstanding matters from the fifth Parliament.
	
	The committee met today to receive a briefing on the fifth Parliament legacy report and on outstanding matters that Scopa did not have time to conclude in the fifth Parliament. The committee has resolved to deal with the outstanding matters, particularly matters on entities that have critical issues such as Eskom, South African Airways, South African Broadcasting Corporation, municipalities and the Department of Water and Sanitation.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Mkhuleko Hlengwa, has already written to the accounting officers of all the departments and entities that have outstanding matters to schedule meetings with them. The Chairperson has also indicated that it will be very important in this current parliamentary term for Scopa to not only visit head offices but to also go on the ground when conducting oversight visits on the various entities and departments. This is in order for committee members to ensure that what is on paper correlates with what is happening on the ground.
	
	Scopa has vowed to put the bite back in the bark and to spare no effort in following the money trail in ensuring effective and efficient oversight and accountability in the pursuit of consequence management.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SCOPA, MR MKHULEKO HLENGWA.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more