Parliament, Monday, 22 July 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs has launched an official twitter page @PConHomeAffairs in an effort to strengthen its oversight work. The platform is intended to bridge the communication gap between the committee and the people requiring services from the Department of Home Affairs. “If we are to enhance service delivery to the required standards, we must be willing to adapt to changes in the environment in which we operate. Social media presents an opportunity for instantaneous communication with the public and will assist in providing first-hand information about their daily experiences at Home Affairs offices,” said Advocate Bongani Bongo, the Chairperson of the committee. The committee views effective oversight as a precursor to efficient service delivery. Furthermore, effective oversight requires that a variety of voices are heard in order to achieve a balance of views. “But people must also realise that oversight does not only mean highlighting the negatives, it should also highlight those departmental systems that are working to enable the department to replicate positives across its system and improve service delivery,” Adv Bongo emphasised. The committee intends to use issues raised on the social media platform as a basis for its oversight over the department. The department will also be required, from time to time, to respond directly on issues raised on the platform. The committee’s Twitter page is @PConHomeAffairs. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, ADV BONGANI BONGO For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion.Read more