Parliament, Thursday, 11 July 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration welcomed the direction which the Minister of Public Service and Administration, Mr Senzo Mchunu is steering the department on. Mr Mchunu delivered the department’s Budget Vote Debate speech in the National Assembly at Parliament today. Speaking post the debate, the Chairperson of the committee, Mr Tyotyo James said the committee echoes the sentiment and stand of Minister Mchunu and will support him in efforts to root out fraud and corruption in the public sector. “If you tremble at corruption, then you are my comrade”, emphasised Minister Mchunu and in supporting the budget vote we support the fight against corruption. In his speech the Minister indicated that the President has assigned three Ministers of DPSA, Finance and Public Works and Infrastructure to identify areas in the Guide on Executive Members, commonly known as the Ministerial Handbook that have upper limits on purchasing of cars, tariffs on private vehicles and security upgrades. Mr James said that this review will be completed in two months’ time and the committee will be engaging the Minister and the Department to ensure that the best is done with what is available. “We are mindful of the fact that the public service needs to be reconfigured, we require a macro structure which will work for the country. It is not the size of the public service that is the focus but the high wage bill which government has to foot” said Mr James. On this note, Mr James made an appeal to the Minister that whilst the department is being reconfigured, “we must consider the high unemployment rate and lack of skills in youth in the country. We welcome the removal of experience as a requirement for entry level posts and encourage the department to employ and skill more women”. He said: “We must embrace the 4th industrial revolution and move the public sector ahead and whilst this is happening, we must not lose sight that a serious intervention is required to address the number of disciplinary cases and the time taken to finalise these cases must be put in place immediately. This impacts on the wellbeing of the public sector where you have cases being dragged on for years whilst the incumbent draws a salary with no work being done.” The committee also observes that the duration of acting appointments are long and urged the Department to ensure that when a person is appointed to act, such acting is for a short time as the vacant posts must be filled. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION, MR TYOTYO JAMES. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”.Read more