Parliament, Sunday 28 July 2019 – The National Council of Provinces is scheduled to consider and decide on the 2019 Appropriation Bill at its plenary sitting at 11.00 on Tuesday. This follows the National Assembly agreeing to the Bill at its plenary sitting on 23 July. The Appropriation Bill proposes appropriating money from the National Revenue Fund for requirements of the state and sets conditions for spending funds withdrawn. The Minister of Finance tabled the 2019/2020 national budget in Parliament on 20 February, together with the 2019 Appropriation Bill. The Bill lapsed after the last sitting of the National Assembly before the May general elections but the sixth Parliament’s National Assembly revived the Bill in June. The Minister of Finance tabled proposed amendments to the Bill on 25 June, including authorising expenditure of R17.652 billion to Eskom. There are no plenary sittings and committee meetings of the National Assembly this week. Members of the National Assembly are embarking on a leave period this week and a constituency period from 5 August to 19 August. The National Council of Provinces is scheduled to embark on constituency and leave periods from 5 August to 19 August. There are five meetings of National Council of Provinces committees this week. They are: TUESDAY Select Committee on Land Reform, Environment, Mineral Resources and Energy: Fifth Parliament committee’s legacy report; prioritising issues for remaining 2019 terms; consideration and adoption of minutes WEDNESDAY Select Committee on Petitions and Executive Undertakings: Consideration of AbaThembu Petition (requesting intervention of the National Council of Provinces in relation to alleged persecution and ostracisation of the AbaThembu nation); tabling of committee’s second term programme Select Committee on Public Enterprises and Communication: Department of Public Enterprises briefing, following concerns raised by the BBBEE Forever Consortium Select Committee on Transport, Public Service and Administration, Public Works and Infrastructure: Department of Transport briefing on strategic plan and annual performance plan; consideration and adoption of minutes; consideration and adoption of second term committee programme Select Committee on Appropriations: Parliamentary Budget Office presentation of its Quarterly Economic Brief; consideration of draft minutes of previous meetings Please click:https://tinyurl.com/yxk3396g for more details of these committee meetings ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more