Parliament, Thursday 18 July 2019 – Parliament joins the rest of South Africa and the international community in observing the Nelson Mandela International Day tomorrow, Thursday, 18 July 2019, the day the founding President would have turned 101 years.
	
	Tata Madiba’s birthday was unanimously declared the Nelson Mandela International Day, commonly known as Mandela Day, by the United Nations General Assembly in 2009.
	
	This year’s celebration of the Mandela Day thus marks a decade since the UN declaration. The UN resolution recognizes Mandela’s values and his dedication to the service of humanity in conflict resolution; race relations; promotion and protection of human rights; reconciliation; gender equality and the rights of children and other vulnerable groups; the fight against poverty; the promotion of social justice. It also acknowledges his contribution to the struggle for democracy internationally and the promotion of a culture of peace throughout the world.
	
	In this day, Parliament urges all South Africans to undertake positive, selfless, individual or team actions to donate at least 67 minutes of their time in service to their communities to change the world around them.
	
	The Presiding Officers, led by the National Assembly Speaker Ms Thandi Modise, and National Council of Provinces’ Chairperson Mr Amos Masondo, have stressed that the Mandela Day provides an opportunity for recommitting Parliament to pursue the ethos and the ideals of a caring, responsive and activist society that spares neither strength nor effort to build a socially just world order.
	
	As South Africa mark's 25 since the democratic breakthrough of 1994, with President Mandela as the founding President of a free and democratic nation, we must unite behind a common goal of intensifying fundamental change, including through acts of kindness in our neighbourhood, to take our country forward.
	
	As part of observing this important call to action, Parliament Art Gallery in partnership with the Nelson Mandela Museum are hosting an exhibition on Madiba's life at the Parliament precinct. The exhibition is open to Members of Parliament and the public.
	
	Members of Parliament and parliamentary staff will also spend their 67 minutes in honour of Madiba this year at four schools around Cape Town, namely Mseki Primary School in Gugulethu; Montague Gist Primary School in Grassy Park; Inkanini Primary School in Zwelitsha and Cavalliera Primary School in Kraaifontein.
	
	The programme entails engagement with educators and learners, a hand over of gifts that include projectors, shoes and sanitary towels, amongst others. MPs will also distribute educational material on the work of Parliament to learners to increase public awareness on Parliament.
	
	Media wishing to cover these engagements should contact:
	
	Gugulethu: Masego Dlula on 081 715 9398
	Kraaifontein: Manelisi Ntsodo on 081 716 2021
	Grassy Park: Mlindi Mpindi on 081 716 7329
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICAEnquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”.Read more