Scopa has requested the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) to be alert to instances in which people apply for NSFAS funding on the basis of affidavits claiming to be raised by grandparents, when the parents can afford to pay. This practice has the potential to deny funds to other more worthy applicants. The committee was holding a hearing today with NSFAS to ascertain why it failed to submit its 2018/19 annual reports on time. NSFAS is under administration due to weak control of the disbursement process to students. The Director-General of the Department of Higher Education, Science and Technology, Mr Gwebs Qonde, says the overall assessment of the performance of the administrator is that he has managed to stabilise the institution and is addressing the critical areas related to the 2017 and 2018 close out, the qualified audit received in 2017/18 from the Auditor-General, the Non-Compliance with Laws and Regulations (NOCLAR) findings, and the 2019 and 2020 application process. “The NOCLAR finding of NSFAS raised considerable findings relating to cyber-security and controls at NSFAS in a range of areas. Significant work on the NOCLAR findings has been done at NSFAS since August 2018 to resolve some of the vulnerabilities to fraud and to understand practices that may have taken place (and continue to take place) within the organisation that must be addressed urgently,” he said. The Minister of Higher Education, Science and Technology, Dr Blade Nzimande, stated that part of the challenge with NSFAS is the speed with which the new system was implemented. “NSFAS had two or three weeks, because this thing was announced on 16 December 2017 to be implemented for the following academic year,” he said. Minister Nzimande says there are many other things he would like the Ministerial Task Team to investigate. “For example, there was the Heher Commission, whose report was totally ignored. There are things that we need to pick up there so that we are able to lay a firmer basis for NSFAS to continue its work,” he said. Scopa Chairperson Mr Mkhuleko Hlengwa said the committee will interact with the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Technology on the way forward. “Ours, Minister, is to hold you committed on your own commitments regardless of the circumstances. Ours is not to look at the circumstances, but to look at compliance. Young people out there rely on a functional NSFAS,” said Mr Hlengwa. Faith Ndenze
	30 October 2019 Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more