The Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs has strongly condemned the recurrence of non-submission of annual reports by the Department of Cooperative Governance to Parliament by the 30 September deadline, as the department has again failed to submit its annual report to Parliament. The committee told the department that, tabling of the annual report is not optional, but a statutory requirement.  “It is unfortunate that we are where we are in relation to the annual report of the Department of Cooperative Governance, and unfortunately this interrupts the work of the committee. Tabling of an annual report is a statutory requirement that promotes accountability and transparency of the department, which has an ultimate goal of improving trust and confidence of the public service,” said Ms Faith Muthambi, the Chairperson of committee. The Office of the Auditor-General appeared before the committee at Parliament yesterday to brief the committee on the audit outcomes of the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, and the entities reporting to it. The Municipal Infrastructure Support Agent and the Department of Traditional Affairs also briefed the committee on their annual reports for the 2018/19 financial year. Members of the committee were unanimous in condemning the recurrence of non-submission of the report also given the role of the department to foster cooperative governance across all the spheres of government in the Republic of South Africa. Furthermore, the department must always provide support to the local sphere of government which is currently facing serious challenges. For the past three financial years the department has failed to meet the 30 September submission deadline for tabling of the annual reports to Parliament. Members of the committee told the department that this impacts negatively on the ability of the committee to carry its constitutional mandate of oversight over the department and its entities. Despite the non-compliance by Department of Cooperative Governance however, the entire portfolio showed signs of improvement in the previous financial year. The portfolio includes the Department of Traditional Affairs, Municipal Infrastructure Support Agent, South African Local Government Association, Municipal Demarcation Board and Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities. The improvements include the quality of financial statements submitted by the department to the Office of the Auditor-General for auditing purposes and 40% to 80% improvement in clean audit report. The committee praised the entities on the announcement by AG that there were no significant instances of fruitless and wasteful expenditure within the portfolio something which indicates the fact that taxpayers got value for the money spent by entities and the department of Traditional Affairs. The committee expressed a critical voice on some of the challenges that were highlighted by the AG in the audit report of the CRL Commission. Among those challenges, the committee was more concerned by non-compliance with Supply Chain Management prescripts such as the appointment of tax non-compliant suppliers, lack of contract management that let to cost escalation of contracts beyond the tender threshold of R500 000 and unapproved deviations by the authorised officials. The committee is going to need updates of progress periodically from the entities on their action plans to remedy the highlighted areas of concern. The committee also called for consequence management to deter wrongdoing in the future. By Malatswa Molepo
	9 October 2019 The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”.Read more