Parliament’s committees on finance and appropriations met with the Parliamentary Budget Office (PBO) for a preview analysis of the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) which is going to be delivered tomorrow in the National Assembly (NA) by the Minister of Finance, Mr Tito Mboweni. The NA’s Standing Committee on Finance and Standing Committee on Appropriations and the National Council of Provinces’s (NCOP)’s Select Committee on Finance and Select Committee on Appropriations as well as the finance committees from the provincial legislatures were briefed by the PBO on expectations from the MTBPS. The Minister will table the statement and also introduce the Adjustment Appropriation Bill, Rates and Monetary Amounts and Amendment of Revenue Laws Bill and the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill. The PBO assists Members of Parliament with the implementation of the Money Bills and Related Matters Act, in particular parliamentary committees on finance and appropriations. According to the PBO, the MTBPS is an update on the budget and provides an update on government finances and the economic status of the country, such as changes to spending and revenue collection. Making presentations to the committees, the PBO’s deputy directors said, MTBPS also makes changes to expenditure estimates on unforeseen, emergency and reprioritisation of spending. The Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, Mr Joe Maswanganyi said: “The engagement with the PBO was quite informative, it is important for us to get an independent overview and analysis of the budget, it will empower the committees when conducting public hearings on the MTBS.” On Thursday, the Minister of Finance will appear before a joint meeting of the committees for further deliberations on the MTBPS, and the committees will thereafter conduct public hearings on the policy statement. The National Treasury website defines the MTBPS as a Cabinet policy statement tabled in Parliament about three months before the annual budget, which sets out the economic context and assumptions that inform the following year’s budget, as well as the framework in which the budget is prepared. According to National Treasury the budget framework consists of the fiscal framework, government spending priorities, the division of resources between national, provincial and local government, and a tabulation of the major conditional grants. The budget framework enables national departments, provinces and municipalities to prepare their detailed budgets for the following year. South Africa has a multi-year budgeting process, so the framework covers the present year and the three subsequent years. The fiscal framework sets out government’s revenue projections, spending estimates, borrowing requirements and assumptions concerning debt interest costs over the period, said the Treasury. The medium-term expenditure framework is government’s broad three-year spending plan. The MTBPS also provides a report on spending for the first six months of the fiscal year in which it is tabled. Parliament plays a critical role in the budget process and is responsible for approving all appropriations, following any amendments. Government departments can only spend money that is appropriated by Parliament for a specific purpose. Parliament conducts public hearings on the MTBPS. These hearings cover the economic forecasts, the fiscal framework, revenue assumptions, spending priorities and the division of revenue. Section 6 of the Money Bill Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Bill regulates the process by which the MTBPS is processed in the legislature. Parliament can recommend changes to the division of revenue. By Sakhile Mokoena
	29 October 2019 The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote.Read more