Parliament, Friday, 25 October 2019 – The Standing Committee on the Auditor-General is satisfied with how the Office of the Auditor-General has handled the matter between themselves and the South African Roadies Association (Sara) in relation to the audit process of the National Arts Council (NAC).
	
	Today, the committee met with the Auditor-General, Mr Kimi Makwetu, after it took a decision to request both Sara and the AG to brief the committee about the matter in an effort to assist both parties to find common ground. After being briefed by both parties on the matter, the committee is satisfied with how the AG has dealt with the matter.
	
	The committee also appreciates that Mr Nyatela from Sara brought his concerns regarding the audit process of the NAC to the Office of the AG and to Parliament, to seek clarity on this matter. This engagement assisted the committee and both parties in ironing out any misunderstanding that existed. The committee has also noted that the case has been referred to the Office of the Public Protector and commends Sara for taking this step, and appreciates how the AG has conducted his work to satisfy the process.
	
	Today, the committee was also briefed on the strategic plan and budget of the AG for the 2020 – 2023 financial years. The committee commends the work of the AG and hopes that the memorandums of understanding that the AG plans on establishing with law-enforcement organisations as a result of the amendments of the Public Audit Act, will assist in improving the effectiveness of the work of the AG. The committee also plans to invite the culprits that are failing to submit financial statements in time so that it can be impressed upon them the important of accountability and adherence to expected legislation.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SCOAG, MR SAKHUMZI SOMYO. 
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more