Parliament, Friday, 25 October 2019 – The Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA) has concluded its oversight week programme in the Limpopo’s Makhado Local Municipality. The purpose of the programme was to interact with internal and external stakeholders of various municipalities in the Limpopo Province, as a means of monitoring progress on audit outcome action plans that were developed by local and district municipalities as a result of the 2017/18 municipal audit outcomes. A common outcry from local municipalities, that fall under the Vhembe District Municipality (VDM), is the need for the VDM to hand over the provision of water services to the local municipalities, by allowing the local municipalities to become water services authorities. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr China Dodovu said, this is important for Makhado and Musina local municipalities that are the economic zones that should be allowed to ensure that their own systems and structures are efficient and effective. The committee raised its concern on the tendency of reliance on consultants by municipalities, especially the Makhado Local Municipality. The committee said, consultants do not transfer skills to employees of the municipalities who spend money, on a daily basis, for these services. Mr Dodovu said, over-reliance on consultants falls outside the prescripts of the Auditor-General (AG) and the implications of this will always be an audit opinion that includes irregular expenditure. The committee has noted that all the municipalities fail to apply consequences management. Furthermore, the committee is of the view that nothing will change so long as there are no consequences to those who are found guilty of wasting public funds. Mr Dodovu encouraged the municipal officials to go to police station to open a case of criminal offence should they realise that the municipal council fails to act on a case of mismanagement or theft of public money reported to it. “We cannot allow a situation where people use the state’s money irresponsibly and there are no consequences,” emphasised Mr Dodovu. The committee is of the view that Musina and Makhado local municipalities have made significant improvements, notwithstanding internal and external challenges. The committee urged the Provincial Department of Cooperative Governance to improve the support it provides to local municipalities, especially in dealing with challenges related to the provision of water and appointing local municipalities as water service authorities. The committee said, failure to address challenges of water in the municipalities will have serious implications for Musina and Makhado communities. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON COGTA, MR CHINA DODOVU. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact: Name: Felicia Lombard
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Anybody over the age of 18 can participate indirectly in Parliament simply by voting in the elections.Read more