Parliament, Sunday 06 October 2019 – Members are returning from a two-week constituency work period to a hectic Parliament programme that includes Questions to the President, Budget Review and Recommendations (BRR) Reports, participation at the 3rd Ordinary Session of the fifth Parliament of the Pan-African Parliament (PAP) and the Inter-Parliamentary Union’s (IPU) 141st Assembly.National Council of Provinces (NCOP) Chairperson, Mr Amos Masondo, will be leading a Parliament delegation attending the 3rd Ordinary Session of the fifth Parliament of the Pan-African Parliament (PAP) taking place in Midrand from 07 to 19 October. The 6th democratic Parliament elected five Members: NCOP chairperson - Mr A Masondo, National Assembly Chief Whip - Ms Pemmy Majodina, Dr M Motshekga, Mr Thembekile Majola, and Mr Julius Malema to represent Parliament to the PAP. All members are expected to be sworn in this week excluding Mr Malema who continues from the 5th Parliament.
	
	President Cyril Ramaphosa will be appearing in the NCOP Chamber on Thursday to give oral replies to questions from the delegates to the House. Question for oral replies are one of the ways in which Parliament holds members of the Executive, including the President, to account for the work of government.
	
	National Assembly Speaker, Ms Thandi Modise, will be leading a Parliamentary delegation attending the IPU’s 141st Assembly to be held in Belgrade, Serbia from 13 to 17 October. This biennial Assembly is a forum for the 173 member Parliaments of the IPU to collaborate on global issues and this edition will be held under the theme: “Strengthening international law: Parliamentary roles and mechanisms, and the contribution of regional cooperation.”
	
	In all, 43 parliamentary committees are scheduled to sit this week. Annual Reports of government entities and BRR Reports dominate the business of National Assembly Committees this week with NCOP committees focusing on briefings and reviewing progress reports. The BRR Reports, which help Parliament to evaluate service delivery commitments against government plans and budgets, must be finalised before the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement to be delivered by Finance Minister, Mr Tito Mboweni on 30 October.
	
	Issues for consideration at scheduled committee meetings this week includes:
	
	Tuesday:
	The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development will be briefed by the Auditor-General of South Africa (AGSA), Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation (DPME) and Financial and Fiscal Commission (FFC) on the 2018/19 Annual Reports of the former Departments of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF) and Rural Development and Land Reform (DRDLR) and Entities. Followed by a briefing by the former DAFF on the 2018/19 annual report and 2019/20 first quarter performance and expenditure report including a briefing on the 2018/19 annual reports by the Commission on Restitution of Land Rights (CRLR).
	
	The Portfolio Committee on Sports, Arts and Culture will be briefed by the Auditor- General’s Office on the outcomes of the Department of Sports and Recreation and the Department of Arts and Culture annual reports and their entities and the Department of Arts and Culture to brief the committee on their first quarter performance report for 2019/2020 financial year and the Department of Sports and Recreation to do the same as well.
	
	The Auditor General’s Office will also brief the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the audit outcomes of the Department of Home Affairs, the Electoral Commission (IEC) and the Government Printing Works (GPW) for financial year 2018/19 and the briefing by the DHA, IEC and GPW on their annual reports for financial year 2018/19.
	
	Wednesday:
	The National Council of Provinces (NCOP) Select Committee on Petitions and Executive Undertakings will meet for the consideration and adoption of the Ndlovu Petition – the petition calling for the intervention of the NCOP in a matter relating to reparations and title deeds from the National Ideal Fulfilment Foundation and the consideration and adoption of the progress reports on Executive Undertakings made by Minister of Human Settlement during the policy debate on Budget Vote Number 38 for the Human Settlement on 06 June 2017 and including consideration and adoption of the progress reports on Executive Undertakings made by Minister of Social Development during the policy debate on Budget Vote 17 for the Department of Social Development held on 07 June 2017.
	
	On the other hand, the National Assembly Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development will receive briefings by the departmental entities on the 2018/19 annual reports namely; Agricultural Research Council (ARC); Onderstepoort Biological Products (OBP); National Agricultural Marketing Council (NAMC); Perishable Products Export Control Board (PPECB); Ingonyama Trust Board (ITB) and Communal Property Association (CPA).
	
	Still on Wednesday, the National Assembly Portfolio Committee on Police will receive briefings on the SAPS 2018/19 annual reports by SAPS Visible Policing; Detective Services and Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (DPCI); Crime Intelligence; and Protection and Security Services.
	
	The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy will also receive briefings on the 2018/19 financial year report by the following departmental entities: Central Energy Fund (CEF including African Exploration Mining and Finance Corporation (Pty) Ltd, PetroSA, IGAS, SFF and PASA); South African Nuclear Energy Corporation (NESCA including Pelchem, NTP); National Energy Regulator of South Africa (NERSA); National Nuclear Regulator (NNR); National Radioactive Waste Disposal Institute (NRWDI) and the South African National Energy Development Institute (SANEDI)].
	
	Thursday:
	The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services will be briefed by the Office of Chief Justice to be followed by Legal Aid South Africa on their 2018/19 annual reports.
	
	Meanwhile, the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education will be briefed by the Department of Basic Education on 2019 examination readiness.
	
	The Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure will receive a briefing from the Construction Industry Development Board (CIDB), Council for the Built Environment (CBE) also on the annual reports for the 2018/19 financial year, and the Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation will be briefed by the Department of Performance, Monitoring and Evaluation on the 2018/19 delivery performance of the Department of Human Settlements and its entities, including the Department of Water and Sanitation and its entities.
	
	Friday:
	The Portfolio Committee on Sports, Arts and Culture consider and adopt its budgetary review and recommendation report.
	
	There are no plenary sittings of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces this week. A joint programme committee meeting of the two Houses is scheduled for 10.00 on Wednesday to consider Parliament’s programme for the rest of the year.
	
	For the latest full schedule of committee meetings (updated regularly), please click: 
	https://www.parliament.gov.za/whatson
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more