Parliament, Friday, 25 October 2019 – The Minister of Finance, Mr Tito Mboweni, is scheduled to deliver the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) in the National Assembly next week on Wednesday, 30 October at 14h00. On the same day, he is also scheduled to introduce the Adjustments Appropriation Bill.
	
	The MTBPS plays a critical role in the overall budget process because it sets out the policy framework for the upcoming budget and provides the country and its elected representatives an update on the National Treasury’s assessment of the current economic climate and outlook. The 2019 MTBPS will describe the policy framework for the 2020 Budget and indicate any adjustments that may be recommended to Parliament in respect of the current year’s expenditure plans. As a statement of government policy, the policy statement will assess and explain the trade-offs and choices that must be made to ensure a stable, balanced and sustainable economic growth.
	
	The MTBPS makes it possible for Parliament and the public to interact with the government's budget plans several months ahead of the budget set for February 2020. One of the mechanisms used by Parliament is through committee oversight over government departments when they review the effective and efficient use of available resources. The process is known as the Budget Review and Recommendations Reports, and they must be tabled in the National Assembly before the MTBPS reports are adopted.
	
	Thirty days subsequent the tabling of the MTBPS by the Minister, the finance committees of the two Houses must report on the proposed fiscal framework and the appropriations committees must report on the proposed Division of Revenue and grant allocations to provinces and local governments. The Division of Revenue Amendment Bill (DORA) is then considered.
	
	Photographers and Journalists who are not members of the Parliamentary Press Gallery Association, wishing to cover the MTBPS in Parliament or wishing to broadcast from the parliamentary precinct, are required to send their details before Monday, 28 October 2019 @12:00 to Mlindi Mpindi on 021 403 2340 or 081 716 7329 or at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za
	
	Details required are full names, ID/passport number, name of the media organisation, designation (writer, photographer, for example), telephone number, and cell phone number.
	
	Media wishing to broadcast from the parliamentary precinct should also provide: 
	Make of vehicle(s), registration number(s), number(s) of vehicles, other equipment and time of arrival.
	
	For accreditation to the lock-up that precedes the delivery of the MTPBS in the National Assembly, Parliament, please contact National Treasury official Jabulane Mulambo on 012 315 5526 or Jabulane.Mulambo@treasury.gov.za  
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICAEnquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more