Parliament, Wednesday, 2 October 2019 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, Adv Bongani Bongo, expressed his dismay at the actions of the Mayor of the City of Johannesburg, Mr Herman Mashaba, who has resorted to communicating through the media with the committee.
	
	The committee is of the view that the current immigration challenges facing South Africa and other countries can be successfully dealt with through cool heads.
	
	Following the recent spate of xenophobic violence that took place across the country, the committee took a decision to invite various stakeholders to discuss ways of strengthening the system of immigration in South Africa to avert the occurrence of xenophobic violence in future.
	
	The invited stakeholders included the City of Johannesburg, the City of Ekurhuleni, the South African Local Government Association and the Department of Home Affairs. The meeting is scheduled for 22 October 2019. The metros have been invited because of the heavy burden they carry of illegal immigrants who reside in these municipalities.
	
	Following this decision, the committee has sent a communication to the City of Johannesburg Mayor’s Office on 29 September 2019, informing the mayor about the invite. “What is disturbing is that the committee was inundated with media enquiries about the invitation following the release of the media statement by the Mayor of the City of Johannesburg. This happens despite the fact that the mayor has not formally indicated to the committee his availability to this meeting. This calls into question the bona fides of the mayor in dealing with this challenge,” Adv Bongo said.
	
	The committee has on various occasions highlighted that the challenges facing the country in relation to immigration, require serious commitment from all the sectors of the society “if we are to find workable solutions”. “The meeting is convened in the spirit of working together and finding workable solutions together to the migration challenge, and not for political point-scoring,” Adv Bongo emphasised.
	
	Also, the committee hold the view that while there are challenges within the immigration application process, there are also positive elements in the process that the mayor seems to disregard. These, according to the committee, include the streamlining of the application process and introduction of the electronic processing system at the Desmond Tutu Refugee Centre that are aimed at eliminating corruption within the system.
	
	Adv Bongo said the positive elements in the process need to be strengthened and the aim of the meeting is to do just that. Furthermore, the finalisation of the Border Management Agency Bill by Parliament is an attempt to strengthen the process. Despite these minor concerns, the committee is hopeful that the meeting will yield tangible results and the invited stakeholders will offer solutions to the current challenges.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, ADV BONGANI BONGO 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party.Read more