Parliament, Wednesday, 9 October 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration is concerned that the budget shortfalls experienced at Statistics South Africa (Stats SA) might negatively affect the entity’s ability to produce quality official statistics for the country. Committee Chairperson Mr Hubert James raised the committee’s concerns in a letter to the Minister in the Presidency, Mr Jackson Mthembu, where he also warned that the budget cuts place the quality of basic statistics at risk and compromises the ability of the government to plan for the future. “Budget shortfalls experienced are at an alarming state, rendering the department ineffective in producing quality official statistics for the country. Moreover, discontinuation of crucial statistical series such as the Poverty and Living Conditions Surveys and Quarterly Labour Force Surveys, to mention a few, affects the generation of crucial information towards proper planning,” said the Chairperson. Mr James says budget cuts in government should not disregard mandates, as this has long-term effect on the stability of crucial departments, like Statistics South Africa. Statistics South Africa is a hub that influences the country’s national planning through quality statistics. Therefore, severe budget cuts on compensation of employees and operations is a violation of the Statistics Act, even the Constitution. The committee also noted that Stats SA has not made any appointments since October 2016, except for the Statistician-General in November 2017, due to the Compensation of Employees' Bill not being adequately funded. The entity reported a vacancy rate of 17.2%, based on 605 posts being vacant as at the end of March 2019. Mr James also appealed to the Minister to urgently escalate the matter to the President prior the adjustment of the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLION COMMITTEE ON PBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION, MR TYOTYO HUBERT JAMES. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact: Name: Sakhile Mokoena
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2804
	Cell: 081 705 2130
	E-mail: smokoena@parliament.gov.za The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”.Read more