Parliament, Wednesday, 16 October 2019 – The Chairperson of the Ad Hoc Committee to Initiate and Introduce Legislation Amending Section 25 of the Constitution today said the committee is scheduled to meet on Friday in order to finalise its programme with draft dates for its future activities.
	
	Committee Chairperson, Dr Mathole Motshekga, said one of these activities include a two-day workshop with experts envisaged to take place during next month. The proposed names of these experts will be presented to the committee on Friday and confirmed by the meeting. These experts will be invited to consider the report of the Joint Constitutional Review Committee and the resolution of the National Assembly on 25 July 2018, mandating the establishment of the Ad Hoc Committee to amend Section 25 and to express their views on the policy direction to be reflected in the Bill.
	
	He said the experts will be requested to provide the Committee with a paper on what they intend to present at the workshop to enable the Committee to structure the workshop. An independent facilitator will be requested to guide presenters at the workshop.
	
	Dr Motshekga said the committee is committed to finalise its work by the deadline of 31 March 2020.
	
	Details of the meeting are as follows: 
	Date: Friday, 18 October 2019
	Time: 9.00 am
	Venue: Committee Room V454, Fourth Floor, Old Assembly Building.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE TO INITIATE AND INTRODUCE LEGISLATION AMENDING SECTION 25, DR MATHOLE MOTSHEKGA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more