Parliament, Wednesday, 23 October 2019 – The Portfolio Committee Portfolio on Higher Education, Science and Technology is gravely concerned that the National Skills Fund (NSF) has appointed two Acting Chief Financial Officers (CFOs) to execute duties while the permanent one is seconded to oversee the implementation of the so-called Siyaphambili project within the entity.
	
	This is very concerning given the regressed audit outcome from an unqualified audit opinion in 2017/18, to a qualified opinion during the year under review. Furthermore, the NSF is one of the 15 auditees within the Higher Education Portfolio that had submitted their annual financial statements to the Auditor-General (AG) with material misstatements, and areas of qualification on accruals and receivables.
	
	Of great concern is that the NSF’s service delivery performance for 2018/19 is not satisfactory. The entity only achieved 10 of the 16 planned targets as per its Annual Performance Plan (APP). The entity incurred irregular expenditure during the year under review. However, it was not investigated as per the requirements of the Public Finance Management Act, as reported by the AG.
	
	“The committee calls for this unusual situation of the two acting CFOs to be corrected so that there could be stability in the NSF. The inadequate action plan developed by the entity to address the audit findings as presented to the committee today, was concerning as it did not provide assurance that there is commitment to strengthen internal controls to ensure that there is no recurrence of the audit findings,” said Mr Philly Mapulane, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	
	The committee resolved to summon the NSF to reappear before it to address areas where there were insufficient responses, including the details of the irregular expenditure, the significant spike, that is, R11 million, in the operational expenditure on personnel, plans with regard to the utilisation of the R6 billion invested in the Public Investment Corporation (PIC), update on the dispute between the Minister and Business Unity South Africa on the Seta regulations regarding the changes in the payment of mandatory and discretionary grants.ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, MR PHILLY MAPULANE.
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr) 
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more