Members of the Portfolio Committee on Sports, Arts and Culture have raised concerns about the need for the work of the Moral Regeneration Movement (MRM). MRM was in Parliament today, 29 October 2019, to brief the committee on its annual report. Mfundisi Smangaliso Mkhatshwa, the Chairperson of the MRM, said the organisation wanted to ensure that values were instilled in communities. “We are achieving most of the work through partnerships. Without them most of the work would not be achieved. We take these partnerships serious, especially if they speak to the mandate of moral renewal throughout the country,” Mfundisi Mkhatshwa said. MRM had developed a charter to guide its work and this has been translated into various languages. Committee member Mr Wilhelm Faber said government departments should be doing this work, rather than the MRM. “Departments are not doing their jobs. SA is multi-religious and cannot have a government entity that seems to promote the values of one religious grouping,” he said. Committee member Mr Ringo Madlingozi concurred and said MRM was a duplication of what should have been done by government. “What have you done about the moral situation in our country? What could you point to as your achievement?” he asked. He also wanted to know what the MRM was doing about fake Christian pastors who were misleading South Africans. He cautioned that MRM should guard against being used as a propaganda machine for Christian beliefs. The MRM replied that it encourages all religious affiliations to be part of its programmes. Committee member Ms Veronica van Dyk wanted to know why the MRM was not operating in the Western Cape and how, in the context of the charter being signed by political parties, corruption still flourished. Other Members of the committee wanted to know about funding and missing financial statements. The committee also heard about the allegations of a “missing R100 million”. The Director-General of the Department of Arts, Culture and Sport, Mr Vusi Mkhize, said the “missing R100 million” was propaganda put about by the City Press newspaper. The committee allowed MRM to prepare written responses when it came to outstanding questions and financial information. Committee Chairperson Ms Beauty Dlulane said the committee will allocate time in the next quarter where MRM will be invited to return to present additional information on its performance. Sibongile Maputi
	29 October 2019 Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more