Parliament, Friday, 11 October 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Health said it is impressed with the South African Medical Research Council’s (SAMRC) and the Council for Medical Schemes’ (CMS) audit outcomes and performance for the 2018/2019 financial year.
	
	On Thursday, the committee was briefed by the two entities on their annual reports and financial statements for the year. These briefings follow the briefing from the Auditor-General of South Africa, which reported that the health portfolio improved, as the Medical Research Council (MRC) improved its audit outcome to unqualified with no findings.
	
	The committee urged the MRC to continue on this path, while generating and maintaining revenue. The MRC revenue of R1.053 billion generated for the year under review included government grants to the value of about R544 million. It has accumulated reserves for 2018/19 of approximately R286 million.
	
	Briefing the committee, the CMS said it received an unqualified audit opinion with emphasis of matter. In its presentation, CMS indicated that it achieved 80% of its performance targets for 2018/2019.
	
	The committee noted that entities that are able to generate money and improve their audit findings comply with the Public Finance Management Act and pay attention to detail.
	
	On the Health Market Inquiry report released by the Competition Commission, the committee said it will wait to be briefed by Minister of Health on the CMS’s response.
	
	Next week on Tuesday, the committee will be briefed by the Department of Health on its annual report and financial statement for 2018/19. The committee said that issues in the public domain will be raised during the meeting with the Minister of Health and the department.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, DR SIBONGISENI DHLOMO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more