Parliament, Tuesday, 15 October 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy has expressed concern with regard to the corporate governance failures at the South African Nuclear Energy Corporation (Necsa) and called for the Minister to urgently appoint a board.
	
	On Tuesday, the management of Necsa, together with organised labour, briefed the committee about the state of affairs at the corporation.
	
	This happened as a result of a follow-up meeting from the oversight visit in September, in which the committee learnt about the worsening financial constraints faced by the corporation, which could lead to retrenchment of workers.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Sahlulele Luzipo, described the current situation at the Necsa untenable and further called on the Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy, Mr Gwede Mantashe, to urgently look into the newly developed turnaround strategy and, thereafter, present it to the committee.
	
	“Our view is that there is no board at the corporation and there can never be stability. The lack of co-operation between the management and organised labour is equally concerning. We would like to advise them to go back and engage further on how they can work together to resolve the current challenges,” said Mr Luzipo.
	
	The Necsa corporation consists of four subsidiaries, namely NTP Radioisotopes, Pelchem, Pelindaba Enterprises and Safari-1. The corporation failed to table on time to Parliament its annual report for the 2018/19 financial year. The same happened in the last two financial years.
	
	The committee, however, emphasised that going forward it will not tolerate late or no tabling of annual reports to Parliament by any entity under its portfolio.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY, MR SAHLULELE LUZIPO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them.Read more