Parliament, Tuesday, 8 October 2019 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education, Ms Bongiwe Mbinqo-Gigaba, expressed shock and sadness at the death of a 14-year-old learner, who allegedly died at the hands of another learner at a Sebokeng-based school in Gauteng yesterday. Ms Mbinqo-Gigaba has, on behalf of the committee, extended condolences to the family, friends and Thuto Tiro Comprehensive School community, where the young learner died. The young learner was allegedly stabbed to death in a classroom with a pair of scissors by a fellow 15-year-old learner. Ms Mbinqo-Gigaba said: “You are all in our thoughts during this difficult time.” According to media reports, the schoolboy was stabbed in the chest and was declared dead at the school. The incident happened in front of other learners and staff. “Although according to a recent presentation by the Department of Basic Education to the committee on violence in school, statistics seemed to be on the decline, I am extremely concerned about such incidents in our schools. One life lost, is one life too many,” said Ms Mbinqo-Gigaba. She said education is a societal matter, one that all South Africans should play an active role in, to ensure that schools remain safe spaces. “What is happening in schools is a reflection of the society in which pupils live. This violence tends to play itself out on the school grounds when learners think violence is the only way to solve problems or to address challenges,” added Ms Mbinqo-Gigaba. Ms Mbinqo-Gigaba urged the relevant authorities to ensure that trauma counselling services are provided to learners and staff. She said: “We call on all role-players and stakeholders to play an active role in keeping our schools safe in order for them to be conducive to quality education and learning.” ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS BONGIWE MBINQO-GIGABA For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more