The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms Thandi Modise, and the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP), Mr Amos Masondo, have assured the African continent that South Africans are not xenophobic and that every person within its borders is safe from any form of violence, irrespective of nationality. The two Presiding Officers of Parliament recently participated in a “Dialogue on African Migration”, organised by the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM), an agency of the African Union, and held in Cape Town in October. The APRM defined the dialogue “as a timely intervention to take forward the issue of internal and external migration on the African continent”. Migration has become topical as a result of the increase in xenophobic violence. Mr Masondo told the ambassadors and diplomats from across the continent that migration was a global problem that extends beyond the African continent. The dialogue heard that migration was not strange to Africans, to South Africans and the ruling African National Congress, as South Africans have been everywhere in the world during the struggle for liberation. “There are many reasons why people migrate to South Africa and as a country we remain committed to APRM, the Pan African Parliament, the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (Nepad) and all continental bodies that seek to unite the continent of Africa as well as ensure economic growth,” Mr Masondo told the conference. The NCOP Chairperson also condemned the recent violence “disguised as xenophobic attacks” and warned the continent to be “vigilant against fake news”. He also urged all foreign nationals living in South Africa to respect the laws of the country and not to be involved in illegal activities. “We see and view the unfortunate events disguised as xenophobic attacks as seeking to reverse the political gains of Pan-African unity. We are shamed by what happened and we condemn this criminality unequivocally,” he said. Speaker Modise reiterated the condemnation of the violence between South Africans and foreign nationals, which flared un in recent months in Gauteng. “If the dignity of a man is taken because he is Nigerian, it hurts us and we will do what we need to do to stop the violence. We will educate our masses and make sure everybody within our borders is safe from any form of violence,” she said. The two leaders also reminded the ambassadors that the economy of South African was built by migrants who came from across the continent to work in the mines and other industries. They also called for the need to strengthen and deepen relations and work to build a better Africa and the world. The dialogue also discussed the threats and opportunities that migration presents to the continent and its various governments. The delegates agreed that migration had a net positive impact, as it contributes to increased trade and investment, as well as economic growth and development. Delegates in the dialogue also acknowledged that migration presented several challenges for the continent, chief amongst which is the issue of competition for limited resources. The tensions between locals and immigrants was diagnosed as a battle for resources rather than an intolerance of foreign nationals. The perception that migrant communities are associated with crime was also identified as a leading cause of tension. Governments were urged to fight crime in a manner that does not allocate negative labels to migrants, as that fuels the scourge of xenophobia. There was also a call for legal migration to ensure that governments are able to properly plan for and service migrant communities. “We are extremely excited about the solution-orientated discussions we had at the Dialogue on Africa’s Migration. The importance of the free flow of people, goods and services across the continent is well encapsulated in the Continental Free Movement Protocol and we have a responsibility to encourage its speedy realisation. We are energised by the enthusiasm shown by delegates from across the continent about the implementation of the suggestions from the dialogue. We are confident such implementation will have a positive impact on peaceful co-existence between locals and migrants in our communities,” said APRM Chief Executive Officer Professor Eddie Maloka. By Sakhile Mokoena
	30 October 2019 The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote.Read more