The Portfolio Committee on Basic Education heard that all educators currently registered with the South African Council for Educators (SACE) for the first time or updating their registration status must submit the South African Police Service (SAPS) clearance certificate. The committee was today briefed by the Council for Quality Assurance in General and Further Education and Training (Umalusi) on 2018/19 Annual Report and 2019 examination readiness. The committee was also briefed by SACE on their 2018/19 annual report. While the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development’s National Register of Sexual Offenders (NRSO) has not been accessible for quite some time, SACE received a letter from the Department’s Director General, on 2 October 2019, requesting the number of people who will be responsible for screening registration applications against the register so that the necessary processes and system could be finalised. The committee views the letter as a step in the right direction and that SACE will be able to use the NRSO in the new calendar year. The Department of Social Development’s National Child Protection Register (NCPR) is still not accessible to SACE, due to Children’s Act giving access to employers only. However, SACE is submitting the names of the teachers who were struck-off  to the Department for inclusion in the Register. According to the presentation made to the committee, reported cases against educators totalled 765 individual incidences against educators in the financial period under consideration. By incidences, council means that one complaint or file may have more than one incident or complaint in it. One educator may be accused of two or more kinds of breaches of the code of professional ethics, be it corporal punishment, insubordination, absenteeism, and others. The top reported incidences against educators are ccorporal punishment and assault, verbal abuse, victimization, harassment and improper conduct, the use of improper language, alcohol abuse, absenteeism, insubordination, defamation and intimidation, sexual misconduct , rape, sexual assault and fraud, theft and financial mismanagement. SACE also reported that incidences of racism are on the rise and the instances of threats to kill and intimidation were reported low. Cases that were reported to be on the rise are sexual related and Gender-Based Violence. This includes male teachers-on-female leaners, male teachers-on-female teachers, male teachers-on-male learners (prevalent in single-sex schools) and female teachers-on-male learners, which is an emerging trend with the abuse of high school boys. The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Bongiwe Mbinqo-Gigaba, expressed her fear at the type of incidences reported. Rajaa Azzakani
	9 October 2019 The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping.Read more