Parliament, Tuesday, 29 October 2019 – The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) has raised concerns with the manner in which departments and state-owned entities appear to abuse the deviations and expansions process through emergency contracts, and single-source and sole-source transactions. These emergency contracts and sole-source transactions are sometimes avenues through which corruption occurs.
	
	Due to the fact that National Treasury only notes these sole-source transactions after the fact, it becomes difficult for them to check whether it was necessary for the transaction to occur. Scopa is concerned with contracts with no start or end date, which require deviations and expansions. For this reason, the committee has requested National Treasury to provide a list of all emergency contracts and sole-source contracts that required deviations and expansions.
	
	The committee has also requested National Treasury to provide a list of all the contracts where conditional support was granted. The list should detail whether there was compliance to the conditions attached to the deviation or expansion. This is because some of the deviations are used for nefarious reasons. National Treasury has reported that in some projects, departments allow the provider to do the work and request the deviations after the work has been done. Scopa is pleased to learn that National Treasury does not grant those requests, if work is already done.
	
	It is also apparent that there is a level of fiscal dumping when you look at the trends of deviations. There is a huge difference in the amount spent on deviations between the first quarter of R2,2 billion and the R7,7 billion spent in the fourth quarter. The existence of evergreen contracts also poses a big challenge in the fiscus. It is important that National Treasury scrutinise the need for these contracts.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SCOPA, MR MKHULEKO HLENGWA
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more