Parliament, Thursday, 31 October 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Technology expressed its grave disapproval at the absence of Mr Raymond Cele, the Chairperson of the Construction, Education and Training Authority (Ceta). Mr Cele submitted a late apology to the portfolio committee, which was rejected by the committee. The committee submitted its term programme to the Department of Higher Education and Training and entities in time for them to prepare for this meeting. However, the Ceta Chairperson did not communicate his prior engagements with the committee at that time. Mr Cele’s apology was sent to the committee secretary in the early hours of the day of the meeting, Wednesday, 30 October at 00:11, citing that he would be attending court proceedings in the Durban Regional Court. Mr Philly Mapulane, the portfolio committee Chairperson said: “We take exception to the conduct of Mr Cele, which undermines Parliament. Mr Cele knew that the entity was expected to account to Parliament on its 2018/19 annual report. Of great concern is that other Ceta members also learnt on Wednesday that the Chairperson would not attend the meeting. This demonstrates that the Ceta’s house is not in order. My office received a letter of complaint from the National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union making several allegations against the Ceta and the Chairperson, as well as allegations received from the National Skills Authority (NSA). The committee resolved to summon Mr Cele to appear before it to account for the Ceta’s performance and respond to allegations levelled against him and the accounting authority.” The committee also noted with grave concern allegations made against the Chairperson of the Board of Services Sector Education and Training Authority (Seta), Dr Maria Madiope, as contained in the NSA report. It is alleged that the Chairperson misrepresented the accounting authority’s decision, acted unilaterally in placing the chief executive officer (CEO) on leave of absence, and failed to respond to concerns raised by the accounting authority. The NSA noted in the report that, “contrary to the spirit of good governance, the Chairperson was reckless and malicious by unilaterally granting the CEO leave of absence at a crucial period when the Services Seta was undergoing an audit. In doing so, the Chairperson did not act in the best interest of the Services Seta. This is an indication of serious governance issues that require urgent attention.” The NSA also noted that the accounting authority members appear to have lost respect for the Chairperson and have resorted to recommending to the Minister that the Chairperson be removed from the accounting authority of the Services Seta. The committee strongly condemns the conduct of the Chairperson of the accounting authority and calls upon the Department to ensure that steps are taken to restore good governance in the entity that is entrusted with public funds to address South Africa’s skills shortage. The committee has further requested the Services Seta to respond to all allegations contained in the NSA’s report in writing to the portfolio committee within seven days, after which the committee will schedule another engagement with the Services Seta. “The portfolio committee is determined to deal with allegations of misappropriation of funds and corruption within the Setas, allegations that have brought the image of all Setas into disrepute. We will never allow impunity, which seems to have characterised the management of Setas, to continue,” said Mr Mapulane. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, MR PHILLY MAPULANE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament.Read more