Parliament, Monday, 14 October 2019 – The Joint Standing Committee on Financial Management of Parliament has reassured the family of the late Mr Lennox Garane, about its commitment to monitor closely the implementation of all recommendations in the Public Service Commission (PSC) inquiry report. The committee also reassured the public on this point.
	
	The PSC conducted an inquiry into the circumstances leading to the death of Mr Garane, upon the request of Parliament’s executive authority. The PSC made a number of recommendations for their consideration. The committee reiterated that the executive authority should guarantee that all the recommendations be implemented and measures put in place to prevent a recurrence of the incident.
	
	It further resolved that recommendation number 17.4 of the report should be implemented equally with the others. The recommendation states: “The level of fitness and proficiency of Ms Baby Tyawa, Adv Modibedi Phindela and Mr Dumisani Sithole to hold leadership and management positions should be assessed. This includes an assessment of their people management skills. Any gaps between the required and observed fitness and proficiency levels that may be identified, as well as the conclusions reached by the PSC on the Terms of Reference should be addressed through developmental programmes that may entail coaching, mentoring and formal training programmes, consequence management and other corrective measures.”
	
	The committee was briefed by the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr Amos Masondo, on the outcomes of the PSC inquiry.
	
	The committee dealt with the report on Wednesday following its postponement of a meeting in September to allow the executive authority the opportunity to first brief the family of Mr Garane.
	
	The Co-Chairpersons of the committee, Ms Gladys Mahlangu and Ms Peace Mabe, reiterated that Mr Garane’s death has brought to light some serious shortcomings with regards to the administrative side of Parliament. They also reiterated their condolences and thanked the Garane family for their co-operation.
	
	“We strongly believe that the management of Parliament should have handled the whole situation differently. We emphasise, however, that Parliament should put measures in place to ensure that similar incidents never occur again,” said Ms Mabe.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CO-CHAIRPERSONS OF THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT OF PARLIAMENT, MS GLADYS MAHLANGU AND MS PEACE MABE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more