Parliament, Thursday, 10 October 2019 – Parliament’s delegate to the Pan-African Parliament (PAP), Dr Mathole Motshekga, has urged all African Union (AU) affiliates to ratify and implement the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), to free the full potential of women. Speaking during the debate of the report on the PAP activities on the AfCFTA, Dr Motshekga said: “Mother Africa is the cradle of all humanity, both black and white, thus there should be no room for tribalism, racism and patriarchy in the implementation of the African Continental Free Trade Area. We must use this agreement to free the full potential of women, who are the custodians of cultural industrial skills.” Dr Motshekga said the cultural, social and economic integration of Mother Africa is the central aspiration of the people of Africa. “In this regard, the African Continental Free Trade Area, launched in January 2018, is one of Agenda 2063’s flagship programmes”. The goal of the AfCFTA is to promote intra-African trade and offer an opportunity to create larger economies of scale, a bigger markets and improve the prospects of the African continent to promote investment. One of its aims is to improve the movement of goods and services, capital and means of production across the continent. “As South Africans, we shall work with other members of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Region to promote cultural, social and economic integration. We believe that the decision of the SADC countries to domesticate Swahili will further enhance regional integration.” Within SADC, South Africa will ensure the prioritisation of cross-border value chains in key sectors such as energy; mining and mineral beneficiation; manufacturing; infrastructure and agro-processing. The PAP’s mandate, at national level, is to advocate for the ratification and domestication of relevant trade agreements by AU Member States, while also lobbying for the removal of tariffs and non-tariff barriers to trade. It is also tasked with the empowerment of national portfolio committees on trade to effectively carry out their parliamentary oversight, legislative functions and holding the executive accountable on the ratification of trade agreements and implementation of trade facilitation measures. This 3rd Ordinary Session – taking place at the PAP headquarters in Midrand from 7 to 18 October - is held under the African Union’s theme of 2019: “Refugees, Returnees and Internally Displaced Persons: Towards Durable Solutions to Forced Displacement in Africa.’’ For media enquiries and interviews with the Parliament of RSA delegation, please contact: Modise Kabeli
	Cell: 081 715 9969
	Email: mkabeli@parliament.gov.za ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping.Read more