Parliament, Friday 11 October 2019 – The Chief Whip of the Majority Party in the National Assembly, Ms Pemmy Majodina, has urged other delegates to the Pan African Parliament (PAP) to ensure that their next delegations include a person with a disability.
	
	In terms of Article 4 (2) of the Protocol to the Treaty Establishing the African Economic Community relating to the PAP, each State shall be represented by five members with at least one of them being a woman.
	
	Speaking during the debate of the PAP’s Committee on Gender, Family, Youth and People with Disability’s Report on the Draft Model Disability Law, Ms Majodina said: “I am deeply concerned that as Africans, we seem to be good in talking and crafting good laws and policies, but drag out feet in the implementation of those laws and policies. It is high time that we begin to walk the talk. We must ensure that our countries’ next delegations to the PAP include a person with a disability.”
	
	Ms Majodina expressed concern that the PAP Bureaux had only one woman (out of the five) with the Bureaux of Committees, the leaders of country delegations and Regional Caucuses all dominated by men. “Even within the PAP staff and officials from our national Parliaments, there are no staff members or officials with disabilities. We must respect people with disabilities and do nothing about (them) without (them),” she said.
	
	Ms Majodina called on the PAP to, in its next Session, set aside a-day-of-accountability to check on the progress made in the ratification of the AU Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Persons with Disability in Africa. Only five AU Members States, out of 55, have signed the Protocol but none have ratified it yet. Those who signed are Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Gabon, South Africa and Togo.
	
	She also strongly condemned the killing of people with albinism and called upon the African governments to take strong action against the perpetrators of these barbaric acts.
	
	One of the aims of The African Model Law on Disability is to provide basic principles to be observed by State and non-State institutions and actors in respect of persons with disabilities. The purpose of the Law is to provide a legal and institutional framework for the protection and promotion of the rights of persons with disabilities, in line with the existing international and regional legal and policy instruments.
	
	South Africa ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with disabilities in 2007 and has embarked on a structured process to embed the obligations of the Convention in South African law, policies and programmes.
	
	The South African Constitution, which is the supreme law of the land, expressly protectsthe rights ofpersonswith disabilities by providing that the State must take whatever steps necessary to protectand advance persons, or categories of persons, disadvantaged by unfair discrimination.
	
	Parliament, on the other hand, ensures that – among others - there is a sign language interpreter at every sitting to ensure that our proceedings are inclusive and can be followed by all citizens including the hearing impaired.
	
	However, she congratulated the PAP for being visionary and drafting this important Law. “I regard The African Model Law on Disability as one of the important enablers in the attainment of Goal 1 of the AU’s Agenda 2063,” she added.
	
	For media enquiries and interviews with the Parliament of RSA delegation please contact:
	
	Modise Kabeli
	Cell: 081 715 9969
	Email:mkabeli@parliament.gov.za
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Anybody over the age of 18 can participate indirectly in Parliament simply by voting in the elections.Read more