Parliament, Monday, 28 October 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Sports, Arts and Culture has welcomed the South African Broadcasting Corporation's (SABC’s) announcement, and confirmation that it will broadcast live the Rugby World Cup final that will involve South Africa and England. The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Beauty Dlulane, said the course is noble and worth complementing. “We are aware of the commercial dynamics involved in the professional sport, but the committee welcomes this courageous and extra-ordinary step that will benefit many impoverished communities who do not afford to pay television,” Ms Dlulane said. Furthermore, Ms Dlulane said: “We wish there would be more of such gestures in order to make rugby a sport of choice for all South Africans. Many Siya Kolisis’ will be developed through this initiative, and that they will watch the game at the comfort of their homes.” SABC announced on Monday that it will broadcast the final match live on SABC 2 on Saturday. This was after Springbok Captain, Siya Kolisi, made it known that he had to resort to watching at a tavern, the last Rugby World Cup final that featured, and subsequently won, by the Springboks. Ms Dlulane said, many poor South Africans will have the honour of watching their heroes and the President, as he has committed, lift the 2019 edition of the Rugby World Cup in Japan. The committee wished the Springboks a successful week of preparations. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SPORTS, ARTS AND CULTURE, MS BEAUTY DLULANE For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more