Parliament, Tuesday, 29 October 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation welcomes the assurance by the Minister of Water and Sanitation, Ms Lindiwe Sisulu, that while there are challenges with the availability of water in Gauteng, the department has the matter under control.
	
	The committee has since its inception called for a change in users’ water consumption patterns, so that we can conserve the little water we have. “The consumption patterns of clean water has always been a cause for concern. The committee urges the adoption of grey water strategies to avert high consumption levels,” said Ms Machwene Semenya, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	While the committee agrees on the need to reduce water consumption, it also believes that challenges with the provision of water cannot merely be ascribed to drought and consumption patterns. A key contributor to the current challenges is the state of the waste water system and obsolete bulk water infrastructure, which lead to high water losses.
	
	It is an undisputable fact that there is a serious problem with the country’s waste water treatment system. The recent discharge of raw sewage from Rooiwal Wastewater Treatment Works into Apies River, north of the City of Tshwane; the faulty Table View East Sewage pump station contaminating the Diep River and causing a nuisance in the Table View area; the burst sewage pipeline in Praktiseer in Sekhukhune, wherein raw sewage is flowing through people’s houses before discharging into Tubatse River; and the continuing contamination of the Vaal River system are examples of the challenges cause by the poor state of South Africa’s waste water treatment system.
	
	As a consequence of the crumbling waste water system, the little drinking water available is contaminated and more money is needed to clean it to an acceptable level, a cost that is then transferred to the end user.
	
	Furthermore, it is without dispute that underspending on maintenance of the bulk water infrastructure is contributing to high levels of water loss. “The inefficiencies within the system as a result of leaks and non-revenue water must be addressed if we are to safeguard the water resource in the country.
	
	The committee welcomes the announcement of the imminent release of the Water Master Plan, which will provide a blueprint on how South African can protect its water resources. The committee has called for a broad plan that will encapsulate and offer solutions to the entire water value chain. A systematic stabilisation plan must be included in the masterplan in order to address the current decline at this point to prevent a crisis situation that will cost the taxpayer even more money.
	
	Also included in the plan must be a costed plan to maintain infrastructure at municipal level to curb the ever increasing non-revenue water. Furthermore, strategies to recoup debt owed to municipalities and entities of the Department of Water and Sanitation must also be strengthened to ensure that these entities are empowered to deliver their services.
	
	The committee will engage the department to assess the areas of interest in the water master plan.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HUMAN SETTLEMENTS, WATER AND SANITATION, MS MACHWENE SEMENYA 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more