Parliament, Friday, 11 October 2019 – The Select Committee on Education and Technology, Sports and Arts and Culture is concerned by the increase in the number of stabbing incidents in schools across the country. Over the past few days, numerous stabbing incidents have been reported. A 15-year-old girl was stabbed by a fellow pupil at a high school in Isipingo, Kwazulu Natal, while in Mossel Bay, Western Cape, a 16-year-old boy was stabbed by three boys outside his classroom. In Gauteng, a 15-year-old boy was allegedly stabbed to death with a pair of scissors by a fellow pupil. Committee Chairperson Mr Mamagase Nchabeleng said: “These stabbing incidents are becoming alarmingly frequent and we cannot ignore what is playing out in front of us. While we expect the South African Police Services to thoroughly investigate these incidents, we call on families and communities to address these issues at home and to create spaces where learners are educated on alternative ways of addressing their anger instead of resorting to violence.” We cannot ignore the influence of gangsterism and the fact that many incidents are also often gang-related, said Mr Nchabeleng. He called on various role-players, including teachers and parents, to identify at an early stage the infiltration of gangsterism in schools. The committee extends its heart-felt condolences to the family and friends of the victims. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND TECHNOLOGY, SPORTS AND ARTS AND CULTURE, MR MAMAGASE ELLECK NCHABELENG. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Felicia Lombard (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more