Parliament, Wednesday, 23 October 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services today discussed the shortlisting criteria for the position of Deputy Public Protector (DPP).
	
	Committee Chairperson, Mr Bulelani Magwanishe, said the position of Adv Kevin Malunga, the current DPP, becomes vacant in December 2019.
	
	The committee heard that 29 applications/nominations were received, three candidates withdrew, leaving 26 candidates, of which 11 are women and 16 men. Six candidates do not meet the criteria, and in addition, it is currently unclear if one candidate meets the criteria.
	
	A total of 11 candidates have legal qualifications, eight candidates have experience in managing large institutions, and 13 candidates have experience in investigations.
	
	The essential qualifications of the DPP include that the person must be a South African who is fit and proper to hold office and is a practising advocate or attorney for 10 years, or qualified to be admitted, or has lectured in law at a university for at least 10 years, or has specialised knowledge of or experience in the administration of justice, public administration or public finance for 10 years, or a Member of Parliament for at least 10 years, or has any combinations of experience.
	
	The committee resolved to keep the shortlist to eight candidates and interview candidates over two days. The committee will use a set form of questions that will be asked to all candidates. Mr Magwanishe said the shortlisting will take place tomorrow.
	
	Details are as follows: 
	Date: Thursday, 24 October 2019
	Time: 12.30 pm
	Venue: Committee Room G26, Ground Floor, National Assembly Building
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, MR BULELANI MAGWANISHE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party.Read more