Parliament, Wednesday, 23 October 2019 – The Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA) yesterday called on the Executive of the Vhembe District Municipality to take a collective responsibility for the failures and challenges faced by the municipality. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr China Dodovu, said: “The challenges highlighted in the papers are an understatement of what is truly happening in the municipality since the magnitude of the problems extends far and wide. A presentation made by the Auditor-General South Africa (AGSA) in Parliament during August highlighted the state of local government in the Limpopo province as one of three provinces that add to the bleak state of local government in South Africa,” he said. A presentation by the AG today augmented the fact that the municipality is in dire financial straits. The committee heard that this state is attributable mostly to poor record management within the municipality, hence the “disclaimer opinion’ received for the past three financial years. The committee notes that there are no records, and therefore no financial accountability. The committee further notes the lack of consequence management, which means everyone does as he or she pleases and no one takes responsibility. Mr Dodovu said that “Irregular expenditure amounting to R1.2 billion for the last financial year is one of the highest in South Africa and is unacceptable”. The committee is of the view that the Department of CoGTA is not effective in discharging its responsibilities. The “disclaimer” audit opinion has been consistent for a number of years and the provincial government appears to have no clear-cut intervention strategies to improve on this. This, he said, should have been used as early warning signs and CoGTA should have noticed the discrepancies at an early stage. The committee heard that the municipality had lost R300 million because of its investment in the VBS Mutual Bank. Mr Dodovu said section 71 of the Municipal Finance Management Act (MFMA) requires municipalities to submit monthly statements to both CoGTA and Provincial Treasury, that the investment in VBS was not a once-off transaction and should therefore have been picked up by both the department and Provincial Treasury. The committee said the municipality has a constitutional mandate of improving the lives of the citizens in its communities and the impact of irregularities, wasteful expenditure, fraud and maladministration in the municipality will have a grave impact on the services delivered. The committee noted the District Audit Outcomes Plan highlighted by the Executive Mayor, Mr Nenguda Dowelani, and the mention of the financial recovery plan. The committee instructed municipal officials to submit to the committee the completed financial recovery plan, no later than 1 November 2019 – and to submit to the committee the monthly reports they submit to CoGTA for the next six months. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON COGTA, MR CHINA DODOVU. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact: Name: Felicia Lombard
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs.Read more