Parliament, Monday, 14 October 2019 – The Speaker of the National Assembly of South Africa, Ms Thandi Modise, was among the 70 Speakers of world’s 179 Parliaments that graced the official opening of the Inter-Parliamentary Union’s 141stAssembly, held at the Sava Center in Belgrade-Serbia last night. The 70 Speakers together with over 1700 delegates have set a new high in the history of the growing 130-year-old forum of world Parliamentarians, affirming the increasing value of Parliamentary Diplomacy among the nations of the world. Thirty-percent of 700 Parliamentarians attending the IPU Assembly is women while 17% of parliamentarians are regarded as young parliamentarians by the IPU, with 45 years of age or younger. Other participants include civil society organisations. The official opening was addressed by the President of Serbia, Mr Aleksandar Vucic, who elaborated on a dream of a peaceful and a prosperous world with Parliamentarians effectively playing their role, championing change and development. Speaker Modise had a courtesy engagement with the Speaker of Serbia Ms Maja Gojković who was accompanied by her advisor Mr Vladimir Orlic, at her offices in Belgrade. She also had a meet and greet time with the President of the IPU Ms Gabriel Barron at the official opening event. Speaker Modise is scheduled to address the general assembly of the IPU today, elaborating on the conference theme of “Strengthening international Law. Parliament’s Roles and Mechanisms, and the Contribution of Regional Cooperation”. The 141stAssembly is expected to make resolutions that are informed by the work of its statutory bodies that are meeting on the sidelines of the General Assembly to drive various thematic issues through its standing committees and sectoral fora. The thematic issues focus on matters regarded as challenges the world over, which require collective and integrated efforts to effectively deal with, by among other the world Parliamentarians. These include continued discrimination and violence against women, money laundering by transnational national criminal syndicates, the ever-present threat of nuclear weapons, ways of strengthening peace and security in the context of conflicts resulting from climate change-related disasters, as well as the mainstreaming of digitization and circular economy in efforts of achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The South African Parliament is represented in the Standing Committee of the IPU dealing with these matters by at least two Members of Parliament. For media enquiries or requests for interviews with the delegation please contact:
	Manelisi Wolela 076 062 2180 Issued by the Parliament of the Republic of South Africa 
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 3706930 Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more