Parliament, Tuesday, 9 October 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises told the Department of Public Enterprises that its performance does not reflect the state of the State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) under its care.
	
	Appearing before the committee today at Parliament to brief the committee on its annual report and financial statements for 2018/19 financial year, the department said its overall performance for 2018/19 financial year is at 80%. Of the 35 indicators the department reported on, for this financial year, it achieved 28 targets.
	
	The committee welcomed the clean audit outcome report received by the department for three consecutive years. However, it questioned how confident the department is in ensuring that the entities that it is responsible for will also follow suit in attaining clean audits and reporting timeously.
	
	Committee Chairperson Mr Khaya Magaxa said, “while we appreciate the clean audit from the side of the department we would like to see the same from the SOEs”.
	
	The Deputy Minister of the Department of Public Enterprises, Mr Phumulo Masualle assured the committee that the department is confident that SOEs will mirror the audit outcomes received by the department although that will take time. He said: “The department has started ensuring that there are right people in the SOEs, ensuring that there are right boards, there is capacity in place and ensuring proper leadership in place.”
	
	Three of the SOEs, South African Airways, South African Express and Alexkor have not submitted their annual financial statements to Parliament by 30 September 2019 deadline.
	
	The committee expressed its concern on the delays in the submission of financial statements and said this is worrisome. The committee was of the view that this is a matter that needs to be addressed and cannot be allowed to continue wherein SOC fail to submit financial statements.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES, MR KHAYA MAGAXA
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed.Read more