The Portfolio Committee on Basic Education today engaged with two non-governmental organisations (NGOs) that focus on the education sector in the country, the Equal Education Law Centre (EELC)) and Section 27. The EELC briefed the committee on a report on “The State of Education 2014 – 2019” whilst Section 27 made a briefing on sanitation in Limpopo. The committee heard that despite nationally determined guidelines, provinces are empowered to determine their own levels of spending. In 2017/18 alone, certain provinces allocated funds below the national threshold across all five quintiles. Whilst the national threshold per learner is R1 243 for poorer school in quintile 1-3, KwaZulu-Natal Education Department spent R955 and Mpumalanga R1 059. The EELC has observed clear challenges with the implementation of the SIAS Policy, including that learners with learning difficulties or disabilities are consistently not being admitted to ordinary public schools and not being reasonably accommodated, and once placed in special schools, learners do not receive adequate educational support. The committee heard that the report is a five-year review of some of the key issues in education, as relates to the EELC’s key areas of work. Inadequate funding of learner transport and inconsistency in which department this function is held, was raised. In some provinces, it is the responsibility of the Department of Education and in others, it is the Department of Transport. The plight of undocumented learners was also raised, with the report highlighting the significant challenges they face in accessing basic education at the point of admission into schools. It is unfortunate when documentation becomes a barrier, said the EELC. Section 27 said it sampled 86 schools. The committee heard that its focus is resourcing the poorer and disadvantaged schools. Of concern is the fact that only 22 of these schools were on the August plans for upgrading by the Education Department in Limpopo. The remaining 19 schools have been left out. It further found that 33 schools that formed part of its research still have pit toilets and unacceptable sanitation conditions, 10 have new sanitation but the pits still existed and had not been demolished, 35 have inadequate sanitation, three schools have sanitation that is not fit for purpose, mainly too big for smaller learners, and 11 schools have poorly maintained toilets. Committee member, Ms Nomsa Tarabella-Marchesi, said the committee should invite the Limpopo Education Committee to explain the discrepancies with statistics regarding sanitation, and also why they were inadequately funding this programme. The organisation recommended an audit and cconsolidated dataset. This should be live in order for it to be updated as things change on the ground. It also recommended an effective plan for school sanitation in Limpopo. It furthermore expressed concern that the number of pit toilets provided by the Department of Basic Education fluctuate so much that it is not sure what the correct figure is. Committee Chairperson, Ms Bongiwe Mbinqo-Gigaba, welcomed the reports and said it is an eye opener. “Stakeholders are an important component. What brings us together is the child. We all want what is in the best interest of the child, irrespective of colour.” By Rajaa Azzakani
	23 October 2019 MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more