The President will tomorrow appear before the National Council of Provinces (NCOP). The appearance forms part of the President’s responsibility to answer questions before the two House of Parliament once in a year as a means of accounting, a responsibility that falls within the ambit of his office. But these questions don’t preclude issues that cut across other departments’ responsibilities that are of national importance. His appearance to these Houses is determined by the programme committee of the respective Houses and the nature of his appearance is also covered in the rules of the Houses of Parliament. Although these questions are written to the President in advance in order to get substantial replies, follow-up questions are often posed to the President for purposes of clarity on interrelated matters. It is expected that the President will, in his appearance, respond to questions related to the key seven priorities that he made mention of during the State of the Nation Address, to state what progress has been made in their regard. The questioning of the President is part of the NCOP’s oversight responsibility to hold the Presidency to account on key performance areas set in its key annual performance areas. An obligation afforded to it by the Constitution. Often, the questions posed to the President are those that fall under the NCOP’s provincial mandate. Because according to the Constitution, the NCOP is charged with the task of ensuring that provincial interests are taken into account in the national sphere of government and the cooperative governance system which falls under its responsibility is conducted effectively and efficiently. Below are some of the questions that the President will respond to. Border control/security 1.         Ms Shahidabibi Shaikh (Limpopo: ANC) Whether, in light of the concerns that were raised regarding border control and security to deter illegal immigration, the proliferation of drugs and various forms of cross-border crimes, the government is developing any mechanisms and processes in order to strengthen border control; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details? CO240E Feedback on Eskom crisis 2.         Mr Dennis Ryder (Gauteng: DA) Whether, following his appointment of Deputy President David Mabuza in February 2019, in his capacity as Leader of Government Business to head a Cabinet Committee to look into the crisis at Eskom, the Deputy President reported back to him regularly on the matter. If not, what is the position in this regard, if so (a) what are the recommendations, and (b) what are the further relevant details? CO234E Review of Stimulus Package 3.         Mr Kenneth Mmoiemang (Northern Cape: ANC) (1)        Whether the government has reviewed the Stimulus Package as part of the strategies to revitalise and bolster job creation. If not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details; (2)        Whether this includes concerted efforts to leverage opportunities that are presented by the Fourth Industrial Revolution in order to create economic opportunities for rural communities and the youth; if not, (a) why not and (b) when will the review take place; if so, what are the relevant details? CO241E Victims of Asbestosis 4.         Ms M Mokause (Northern Cape: EFF) Whether, with regard to the victims of asbestosis who even marched to the Union Buildings in 2018 for intervention regarding the relief that was due to them, particularly in the John Taolo Gaetsewe District Municipality in the Northern Cape (details furnished), any interventions have been made in this regard; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details? CO246E Plans to reduce gender-based violence 5.         Ms Cathlene Labuschagne (Western Cape: DA) With reference to his plans in the Joint Sitting on 18 September 2019 to reduce gender-based violence (GBV) through implementing legislative and policy changes, what mechanisms will be put in place to professionalise and train the police and social services in order to improve the quality of investigations into GBV crimes and increase the conviction rate of offenders in our courts? CO237E Strategic economic interventions 6.         Mr Seiso Mohai (Free State: ANC) Whether South Africa has developed any strategic interventions in order to protect the economy and domestic industries, like the manufacturing sector which is one of the most lucrative, from the raging trade wars that are increasingly creating unstoppable global transformation that will shape global trade relations and the economies of many countries; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details? These questions show the responsibility that the President shoulders and the cross-cutting mandates that the NCOP has to straddle in ensuring that the concept of cooperative government is carried out within the ambit of the Constitution, and done so in a most competent and resourceful way possible. By Abel Mputing
	9 October 2019 A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa.Read more