Parliament, Thursday, 3 October 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Sports, Arts and Culture has said it has noted the row involving Springbok player, Mr Eben Etzebeth.
	
	The Chairperson, Ms Beauty Dlulane, said the matter was sensitive and needed to be handled with care.
	“The matter could have been handled differently and SA Rugby and the Human Rights Commission should improve on dealing with matters of this nature. The approach in handling these matters should be corrective and not what appears to be a media embarrassment of Mr Etzebeth and distraction to South Africa’s participation at the World Cup,” Ms Dlulane said.
	
	Etzebeth is alleged to have abused a homeless man on a night out in the West Coast, an allegation he has since denied. The committee has noted how SA Rugby is dealing with the matter and the steps the company has followed.
	
	Ms Dlulane said if there were grounds for prosecution, that ought to be decided by competent bodies and after a rigorous process of establishing what had happened.
	
	“Running commentary in the media, especially given the seriousness of what Mr Etzebeth is alleged to have done, will not solve anything. Everyone has an opinion on the matter, but the time is for the right bodies to find the facts of the matter and act accordingly.”
	
	She said the committee was concerned about the time that has passed since the alleged incident.
	The committee wished the Springboks well against their do or die clash against Italy on Friday.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SPORTS, ARTS AND CULTURE, MS BEAUTY DLULANE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more