Parliament, Wednesday, 30 October 2019 – The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) today met with the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS), South African Express (SA Express) and Alexkor to ascertain why they did not table their 2018/18 annual reports. NSFAS has provided a date when it will submit, but neither SA Express nor Alexkor have indicated when they will submit.
	
	The committee believes that the previous NSFAS Board failed South Africans by allowing the entity to reach such a point. The entity is currently under administration and has failed to table its annual report on time. NSFAS has been plagued by corruption, particularly by employees who have taken loan money fraudulently, and governance has collapsed.
	
	The committee is encouraged that forensic investigations are currently underway. The committee hopes these investigations will be concluded, so that the monies can be recovered from those responsible. The committee has noted NSFAS’s intention that the Ministry of Higher Education will receive its annual report by Monday, 04 November 2019, for tabling in Parliament. It will wait to see if NSFAS honours this commitment.
	
	Scopa has rejected the report submitted by South African Express (SA Express), which explains why the entity did not submit annual financial statements. The committee does not accept as an excuse for not submitting that a promised government bailout has been delayed. Scopa has learned that SA Express received a letter from government informing it of a R300 million funding allocation. The committee will schedule meetings to further understand the nature of these allocations at state-owned entities, particularly in relation to dealing with the root causes of financial problems.
	
	The committee has also raised concerns about the dire situation at Alexkor, which is also under administration and experiencing liquidity challenges. Alexkor has high debts and no chance of meeting those debts. Scopa will wait to see how the government intervention will assist in the matter. The circumstances at Alexkor differ from the challenges at other SOEs. Scopa expects to receive an update from the Department of Public Enterprises on the way forward in relation to Alexkor within seven days.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SCOPA, MR MKHULEKO HLENGWA. 
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly.Read more