Parliament, Wednesday, 9 October 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Basic Education was today briefed by the Council for Quality Assurance in General and Further Education and Training (Umalusi) on its verification of the state of readiness to quality assure the 2019 National Senior Certificate (NSC) examinations. Committee Chairperson, Ms Bongiwe Mbinqo-Gigaba, lauded Umalusi for highlighting challenges early on, raising it with the Department of Basic Education (DBE) and monitoring that the identified weaknesses are brought to the attention of national department. “History has shown that this process works, as the DBE ensured in the past that all challenges highlighted by Umalusi are addressed prior to the start of the examinations.” The committee heard that the Umalusi verification of the state of readiness for the Department of Basic Education (DBE) was conducted from 11 September and completed on the 1st of October 2019, and that 629 197 full-time candidates were registered as at 30 September 2019, and 122 471 part-time candidates. It assured the committee that it found that acceptable levels of readiness and measures are in place to ensure credible examinations by all the DBE and Provincial Education Departments (PEDs). Umalusi is further satisfied that the DBE, through the nine PEDs, considering the level of readiness, are ready to conduct the 2019 NSC examinations. Umalusi is confident that the assessment bodies will exercise their roles and responsibilities to ensure credible 2019 NSC examinations. The committee heard that quality assurance of assessment is conducted to ensure that assessment leading to the award of certificates in schools, adult education centres and technical and vocational education and training colleges (TVETs) is of the required standard. This is in order to ensure that the certificates issued by Umalusi are credible. This is achieved through, among other things, the moderation of examination question papers, Practical Assessment Tasks (PAT) and Common Assessment Tasks in the case of Life Orientation; monitoring and moderation of School-Based Assessment (SBA); monitoring the state of readiness to conduct, administer and manage examinations; monitoring of the conduct, administration and management of assessment and examination processes; monitoring and moderation of marking; approval of the publication of the results of learners if the council is satisfied that the assessment body has conducted the assessment free from any irregularities that might jeopardise the integrity of the assessment, and certification. Umalusi also appealed to the public not to compromise the education of learners by embarking on service delivery protests. The committee heard the provinces have contingency plans in place with all the relevant authorities. The committee applauded Umalusi for its thorough work in verifying the state of readiness by DBE and its provincial departments to administer the 2019 NSC examinations. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS BONGIWE MBINQO-GIGABA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament.Read more