Parliament Monday, 28 October 2019 – The Speakers' Forum of the Republic of South Africa, led by the Speaker of the National Assembly (NA) Ms Thandi Modise, and the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) Mr Amos Masondo, held its first induction workshop from 23 to 25 October 2019 in Cape Town.
	
	The workshop, which was extra ordinary in many ways, marked the beginning of the sixth term of the Speakers’ Forum in the sixth parliamentary term.
	
	The Speakers’ Forum comprising of the Executive Authority of Parliament (Speaker and Deputy Speaker of NA, Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP) and the Speakers of the nine provincial legislatures, spoke with one voice that it cannot be business as usual in the South African Legislative Sector (SALS) during the current term of Parliament, when the local sphere of government, is facing many challenges into the 25 years of freedom and democracy in South Africa.
	
	Amongst the key issues discussed, the Speakers unanimously agreed to shift the sector to its top gear of acceleration of work over the next five years - for robust and meaningful oversight, law-making and public participation for the betterment of the lives of South African people.
	
	The Speakers’ Forum is the highest decision making body of the SALS that provides policy direction and guidance towards the achievement of goals in the Legislative Arm of the State.
	
	The Induction workshop encompassed presentations of various reports which included the legacy reports of the Fifth Term of the Speakers’ Forum. The Speakers identified and adopted pressing key resolutions which require the Speakers’ Forum’s urgent and special attention to ensure effective, enhanced and speedy implementation of the mandate of the legislative sector during this term. The resolutions include:
	
	Collaboration of Parliament and Provincial Legislatures Law-making Collaboration with Local Government Public Participation
	In order to enhance public participation, the Speakers called for the review of the model of how Parliament the the provincial legislatures deal with petitions. There is a strong need for a systematic approach for tracking, coordination and integration – aimed at enhancing citizen participation through the use of technology.
	
	Capacity Building
	The Speakers called for the continuation of the capacity building programmes for the new Members of Parliament, to ensure that their skills are sharpened on matters of law-making and oversight.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA ON BEHALF OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN LEGISLATIVE SECTOR Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more