Members of the Portfolio Committees on Mineral Resources and Energy, as well as Public Enterprises emphatically rejected the Independent Electricity Management Operator (IEMO) Bill, which is a private member’s Bill, and it was tabled in Parliament on 24 October 2019 by the Chief Whip of the official opposition, Ms Natasha Mazzone. Following its tabling, the Bill was then presented to the Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy, and before deliberating on it, the committee then decided to allow the Department of Public Enterprises to present its response with regard to the Bill to a joint meeting on Tuesday morning. In the introductory remarks during his presentation, the Minister of Public Enterprises, Mr Pravin Gordhan said there is inconsistency in the IEMO Bill between private and public ownership, saying that the original Independent System and Market Operator (ISMO) Bill, which is also a private member’s Bill by Ms Mazzone, was premised on the ISMO being a state-owned entity, whereas the IEMO Bill took model and superimposed private ownership structure. Mr Gordhan further said that while the IEMO Bill seeks to open up the electricity generation market to other stakeholders and give independent power producers the opportunity to have the same access to the electricity market as Eskom, the power utility’s roadmap, on the other hand, speaks to the restructuring of Eskom into Eskom Holdings with three new subsidiaries, namely generation, transmission and distribution. “The formation of a Transmission Entity under Eskom Holdings will foster a competitive market and encourage the use of diverse sources of energy and there are also considerations to create two or more generation subsidiaries to introduce intra-company competition, as well as allowing Eskom’s participation in renewable generation,” said Mr Gordhan. The majority of members from the two committees expressed a similar view on the IEMO Bill, in which they felt that it proposes discrimination between metros and other classes of municipalities. They also held a view that the Bill is there to reverse the gains of democracy by taking electricity generation back into private hands. Meanwhile, a member of the Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources, Mr Kevin Mileham, reiterated that the Bill, as tabled, is open for any amendments and alterations in order to accommodate the broader spectrum of views. The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy, Mr Sahlulele Luzipo, said the committee will deliberate and take official position on the Bill in its own separate meeting. By Justice Molafo
	25 August 2020 Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. African National Congress