Parliament, Thursday, 17 October 2019 – National Council of Provinces Chairperson, Mr Amos Masondo, has tabled a motion urging members of the Pan African Parliament (PAP) to demand the immediate lifting of the economic sanctions imposed on Zimbabwe. Speaking at the 3rd Ordinary Session of the PAP, Mr Masondo said he was making this call, in recognition and appreciation of the PAP’s gallant and heroic 2016 campaign, which led to the successful lifting of economic sanctions imposed by the United States of America (USA) on Sudan. Mr Masondo said the economic, financial and trade sanctions unilaterally imposed on Zimbabwe by the USA, the United Kingdom and the European Union (EU) since 2002 have caused grave harm, not only to Zimbabwe’s economy and its people’s fundamental rights, but the entire South African Development Community (SADC) region, which continues to reel from the catastrophic effect of these sanctions. “We are deeply concerned that these unjustified, unilateral sanctions have a grave and unforgiveable impact on women, children and ordinary citizens of the country.” He said the government of Zimbabwe, under President Emmerson Mnangagwa, has begun a new chapter and is ready to constructively engage with the rest of the world. Therefore continuing with the sanctions harmed innocent citizens and was counterproductive to regional efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. He urged Members of the PAP to join the SADC heads of states in demanding the immediate lifting of economic sanctions unilaterally imposed against the government of Zimbabwe and its people by the USA and the EU. He referred Members to the World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2015 and the adoption of Agenda 2030 for sustainable development, which emphasised, amongst other things, the absolute rejection of the unilateral coercive measures by the international community. These unilateral sanctions, he said, have a serious impact on Africa’s Agenda 2063 Goals and Priority Areas, in particular Goal 6 which calls for Member States to strive for Africa whose development is people-driven – especially women, youth and caring for children. The plenary resolved to postpone the motion and debate it in the next Session. For media interviews with the NCOP Chairperson, Mr Masondo, please contact:
	Modise Kabeli
	Cell: 081 715 9969
	Email: mkabeli@parliament.gov.za Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs.Read more