Parliament, Tuesday, 22 October 2019 – The Portfolio Committee on Basic Education wishes all candidates enrolled for the 2019 National Senior Certificate (NSC) well for the examinations, which commence in earnest tomorrow when all learners write English. Committee Chairperson, Ms Bongiwe Mbinqo-Gigaba, said: “We would like to wish all candidates the best of luck with the upcoming final examinations. We urge them to continue working hard and to keep their focus. These examinations are a culmination of the last 12 years of schooling. Furthermore, we call on parents, family, friends, educators, officials and the community at large to help create the best conditions and environment for these learners to study.” Some Grade 12 learners have already started writing the NSC examinations. Final examinations in Advance Programme English, Advance Programme Mathematics, Computer Applications Technology (Practical), Information Technology (Practical), Performing Arts (Practical) and Visual Arts and Design (Practical) have already been completed. The examinations will end on 28 November 2019. The Minister of Basic Education is expected to announce the results on 7 January 2020. A total of 790 405 candidates are enrolled to write this year’s NSC examinations – 620 871 full-time 169 534 part-time candidates. KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng have the largest enrolments again with 184 886 and 154 095, respectively. The Northern Cape has the least amount candidates enrolled with 13 536. The committee urges parents, family members and caregivers to provide candidates with support in every possible manner and to ensure that learners have sufficient study time for the examinations – and that their emotional and mental well-being are not forgotten during this period that can be very stressful. The committee further wishes teachers and invigilators the best of luck with the task ahead. “We want everyone to be at their best to ensure credible NSC examinations for 2019,” said Ms Mbinqo-Gigaba. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS BONGIWE MBINQO-GIGABA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more