The Minister of Employment and Labour has called on the Portfolio Committee on Employment and Labour to pay closer attention and monitor the implementation of the Compensation Fund action plan. Minister Thulas Nxesi led a strong delegation that included his Deputy Minister, Boitumelo Moloi, the Director-General (DG), Mr Thobile Lamati, and the Chief Executive Officer for the Compensation Fund, Mr Vuyo Mafata, that came to table an action plan to get back on track the work of the Compensation Fund. “We are starting to move in the right direction but not as rapidly as we would wish on matters concerning the Compensation Fund. The diagnosis of challenges started in 2015, now we are on phase two which began about the strengthening of financial controls,” said Minister Nxesi. He said the Compensation Fund was challenged with IT systems but that was changing. “IT issues are being addressed and now we are implementing the Comp Easy integrated systems. The IT system has always been an issue for many departments. For years there had been challenges with the Sita (State Information Technology Agency).” The committee heard that the Compensation Fund had been challenged with inability to produce financial statements, oversight committees that were too much involved in the operations, and consultants involved in duplicate scope and non-transfer of skills. Committee Chairperson, Ms Lindelwa Dunjwa, said the committee saw it necessary to invite the Compensation Fund back to Parliament following the Auditor-General’s audit outcomes. “The committee needs to hear the Compensation Fund on the turnaround plan, hence it dedicated this day to the Compensation Fund. We wanted to understand how services are affected by dysfunctionality, who benefits, where is it located? There is a lot of work to be done for the Compensation Fund to improve its state of affairs. Mr Mafata took the committee through the second phase of the action plan and said the Compensation Fund had realised it had been too far from its stakeholders. Minister Nxesi suggested that it would be good for the committee to get a report bi-monthly on the progress of the action plan. He announced that the Cabinet had concurred with the extension of the DG’s term for another five years. By Sibongile Maputi
	30 October 2019 The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote.Read more